Rule 47.
Jurors.
(a) Examination of jurors. The court may permit the parties or their
attorneys to conduct the examination of prospective jurors or may itself conduct
the examination. In the latter event, the court shall permit the parties or their
attorneys to supplement the examination as may be proper.
(b) Selection of jurors and alternate jurors. Jurors shall be drawn and
selected as provided in Code of Alabama 1975, § 12-16-70 et seq., unless
otherwise superseded or modified herein.
Regular jurors shall be selected from a list containing the names of at
least twenty-four (24) competent jurors and shall be obtained by the parties or
their attorneys alternately striking one (1) from the list until twelve (12) remain,
the party demanding the jury having the first strike.
The court may direct that not more than six (6) jurors in addition to the
regular jury be called and impaneled to sit as alternate jurors. Alternate jurors
shall have the same qualifications, shall be subject to the same examination,
shall take the same oath, and shall have the same functions, powers, facilities,
and privileges as regular jurors. Unless the parties agree otherwise, the parties
shall be entitled to strike from a list containing the names of three (3) competent
jurors for each alternate juror required in addition to at least twenty-four (24)
competent jurors required for a regular jury.
When the court has determined the total number of jurors, including
alternates, to be impaneled and has imparted that information to counsel and the
clerk, the parties will proceed to strike the jury. When they reach the number
determined by the court to be impaneled, the striking shall continue until the
regular number of jurors is reached. The alternate jurors will be those jurors
whose names had not been struck when the total number determined by the
court had been reached, but whose names were stricken before the regular
number of jurors was reached. When the jury has been selected, the clerk shall
furnish the court with a list of the alternate jurors, in inverse order in which their
names were stricken, i.e., the last name stricken will be listed as alternate juror
number 1, the next to last name stricken as alternate juror number 2 and so on
until the number of alternates determined by the court is reached. The regular
jury and the alternates will be impaneled. Jurors who, prior to the time the jury
retires to consider its verdict, become or are found to be unable or disqualified to
perform their duties shall be discharged. Just prior to the time the jury retires to
consider its verdict, the court shall supply any vacancies from the list furnished
by the clerk, beginning with the last name stricken, then next to last and so on
until the regular number of jurors has been reached.
The court may retain alternate jurors after the jury retires to deliberate.
The court must ensure that a retained alternate does not discuss the case with
anyone until that alternate replaces a juror or is discharged. If an alternate
replaces a juror after deliberations have begun, the court must instruct the jury to
begin its deliberations anew.
(c) Multiple claims, parties, and actions. In all claims or actions tried
together, for the purpose of striking the jury, two or more parties having relatively
similar interests may be aligned as a single party or the court may add additional
names to the list and permit strikes to be exercised separately or jointly; but, in all
events, the plaintiff shall be entitled to one-half of the total number of strikes
allocated to all parties unless the total number of strikes cannot be divided
equally, in which event plaintiff shall have no less than one (1) less than the total
number of strikes allocated to all other parties, nor more than one (1) more than
the total number of strikes allocated to all other parties.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 47 does not apply in the district courts.