Rule 34.
Production of documents and things
and entry up land for inspection and other purposes.
(a) Scope. Any party may serve on any other party a request (1) to
produce and permit the party making the request, or someone acting on the
requestor's behalf, to inspect, copy, test, or sample any designated documents or
electronically stored information (including writings, drawings, graphs, charts,
photographs, sound recordings, images, and other data or data compilations
stored in any medium from which information can be obtained, translated, if
necessary, by the respondent through detection devices into reasonably usable
form), or to inspect, copy, test, or sample any designated tangible things that
constitute or contain matters within the scope of Rule 26(b) and that are in the
possession, custody, or control of the party upon whom the request is served; or
(2) to permit entry upon designated land or other property in the possession or
control of the party upon whom the request is served for the purpose of
inspection and measuring, surveying, photographing, testing, or sampling the
property or any designated object or operation thereon, within the scope of Rule
26(b).
(b) Procedure. The request may, without leave of court, be served upon
the plaintiff after commencement of the action and upon any other party with or
after service of the summons and complaint upon that party. The request shall
set forth the items to be inspected either by individual item or by category and
shall describe each item and category with reasonable particularity. The request
may specify the form or forms in which electronically stored information is to be
produced. The request shall specify a reasonable time, place, and manner of
making the inspection and performing the related acts.
The party upon whom the request is served shall serve a written response
within thirty (30) days after the service of the request, except that a defendant
may serve a response within forty-five (45) days after service of the summons
and complaint upon that defendant. The court may allow a shorter or longer
time. The response shall state, with respect to each item or category, that
inspection and related activities will be permitted as requested unless the request
is objected to, including an objection to the requested form or forms for producing
electronically stored information, in which event the reasons for objection shall be
stated. If objection is made to part of an item or category, the part shall be
specified and inspection permitted of the remaining parts. If objection is made to
the requested form or forms for producing electronically stored information – or if
no form was specified in the request – the responding party must state the form
or forms it intends to use. The party submitting the request may move for an
order under Rule 37(a) with respect to any objection to or other failure to respond
to the request or any part thereof, or any failure to permit inspection as
requested.
A party who produces hard copies of documents for inspection that are not
electronically stored shall produce them as they are kept in the usual course of
business or shall organize and label them to correspond with the categories in
the request.
Regarding the discovery of electronically stored information:
(i) if a request does not specify the form or forms for producing
electronically stored information, a responding party must produce the
information in a form or forms in which it is ordinarily maintained or in a form or
forms that are reasonably usable; and
(ii) a party need not produce the same electronically stored information in
more than one form.
(c) Persons not parties. A person not a party to the action may be
compelled to produce documents, electronically stored information, and things or
to submit to an inspection as provided in Rule 45.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 34 applies in the district courts in those
instances where production and inspections are permitted by Rule 26(dc).