Rule 50.
Judgment as a matter of law in actions tried by jury; alternative motion for
new trial; conditional rulings.
(a) Judgment as a matter of law.
(1) If during a trial by jury a party has been fully heard on an issue and
there is no legally sufficient evidentiary basis for a reasonable jury to find for that
party on that issue, the court may determine the issue against that party and may
grant a motion for judgment as a matter of law against that party with respect to a
claim or defense that cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated
without a favorable finding on that issue.
(2) Motions for judgment as a matter of law may be made at any time
before submission of the case to the jury. Such a motion shall specify the
judgment sought and the law and the facts on which the moving party is entitled
to the judgment.
(b) Renewal of motion for judgment after trial; alternative motion for new
trial. Whenever a motion for a judgment as a matter of law made at the close of
all the evidence is denied or for any reason is not granted, the court is deemed to
have submitted the action to the jury subject to a later determination of the legal
questions raised by the motion. Such a motion may be renewed by service and
filing not later than thirty (30) days after entry of judgment. A motion for a new
trial under Rule 59 may be joined with a renewal of the motion for a judgment as
a matter of law, or a new trial may be requested in the alternative. If a verdict was
returned, the court may, in disposing of the renewed motion, allow the judgment
to stand or may reopen the judgment and either order a new trial or direct the
entry of judgment as a matter of law. If no verdict was returned the court may, in
disposing of the renewed motion, direct the entry of judgment as a matter of law
or may order a new trial.
(c) Same: Conditional rulings on grant of motion for judgment as a matter
of law.
(1) If the renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law is granted, the
court shall also rule on the motion for a new trial, if any, by determining whether it
should be granted if the judgment is thereafter vacated or reversed, and shall
specify the grounds for granting or denying the motion for the new trial. If the
motion for a new trial is thus conditionally granted, the order thereon does not
affect the finality of the judgment. In case the motion for a new trial has been
conditionally granted and the judgment is reversed on appeal, the new trial shall
proceed unless the appellate court has otherwise ordered. In case the motion for
a new trial has been conditionally denied, the appellee on appeal may assert
error in that denial; and if the judgment is reversed on appeal, subsequent
proceedings shall be in accordance with the order of the appellate court.
(2) The party against whom judgment as a matter of law has been entered
may file a motion for a new trial pursuant to Rule 59 not later than thirty (30) days
after entry of the judgment.
(d) Same: Denial of motion for judgment as a matter of law. If the motion
for judgment as a matter of law is denied, the party who prevailed on the motion
may, as appellee, assert grounds entitling the party to a new trial in the event the
appellate court concludes that the trial court erred in denying the motion for
judgment. If the appellate court reverses the judgment, nothing in this rule
precludes it from determining that the appellee is entitled to a new trial, or from
directing the trial court to determine whether a new trial shall be granted.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 50 does not apply in the district courts.