Rule 59.
New trials; amendment of judgments.
(a) Grounds. A new trial may be granted to all or any of the parties and (1)
on all of the issues in an action in which there has been a trial by jury, for any of
the reasons for which new trials have heretofore been granted in actions at law in
the courts of Alabama; and (2) on all or part of the issues in an action tried
without a jury, for any of the reasons for which rehearings have heretofore been
granted in suits in equity in the courts of Alabama. On a motion for a new trial in
an action tried without a jury, the court may open the judgment if one has been
entered, take additional testimony, amend findings of fact and conclusions of law
or make new findings and conclusions, and direct the entry of a new judgment.
(b) Time for motion. A motion for a new trial shall be filed not later than
thirty (30) days after the entry of the judgment.
(c) Time for serving affidavits. When a motion for new trial is based upon
affidavits, they shall be served with the motion. The opposing party has fifteen
(15) days after such service within which to serve opposing affidavits, which
period may be extended for an additional period not exceeding twenty (20) days
either by the court for good cause shown or by the parties by written stipulation.
The court may permit reply affidavits.
(d) On initiative of court. Not later than thirty (30) days after entry of
judgment the court of its own initiative may order a new trial for any reason for
which it might have granted a new trial on motion of a party, and in the order
shall specify the grounds therefor.
(e) Motion to alter, amend, or vacate a judgment. A motion to alter,
amend, or vacate the judgment shall be filed not later than thirty (30) days after
entry of the judgment.
(f) Remittitur. The court may, on motion for new trial, require a remittitur as
a condition to the overruling of the motion for new trial; and, the acceptance of
such remittitur by the plaintiff shall not, on appeal by the defendant, prejudice the
plaintiff’s right to seek reinstatement of the verdict in its full amount.
(g) Presentation of motions not required. Presentation of any post-trial
motion to a judge is not required in order to perfect its making, nor is it required
that an order continuing any such motions to a date certain be entered. All such
motions remain pending until ruled upon by the court (subject to the provisions of
Rule 59.1), but shall not be ruled upon until the parties have had opportunity to
be heard thereon.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 59 applies in the district courts except that (1)
Rule 59(a)(1) dealing with new trials in jury actions is deleted; (2) all time periods
of thirty (30) days are reduced to fourteen (14) days except in unlawful-detainer
actions subject to appeal under §6-6-350, Ala. Code 1975, and actions for
eviction as defined in §35-9A-141(5), Ala. Code 1975, in which actions the time
periods are reduced to seven (7) calendar days; and (3) the provision for time in
which to serve counter-affidavits of Rule 59(c) is deleted.