Rule 15.
Amended and supplemental pleadings.
(a) Amendments. Unless a court has ordered otherwise, a party may
amend a pleading without leave of court, but subject to disallowance on the
court’s own motion or a motion to strike of an adverse party, at any time more
than forty-two (42) days before the first setting of the case for trial, and such
amendment shall be freely allowed when justice so requires. Thereafter, a party
may amend a pleading only by leave of court, and leave shall be given only upon
a showing of good cause. A party shall plead in response to an amended
pleading within the time remaining for a response to the original pleading or
within ten (10) days after service of the amended pleading, whichever period may
be longer, unless the court orders otherwise.
(b) Amendments to conform to the evidence. When issues not raised by
the pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the parties, they shall be
treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings. Such
amendment of the pleadings as may be necessary to cause them to conform to
the evidence and to raise these issues may be made upon motion of any party at
any time, even after judgment; but failure so to amend does not affect the result
of the trial of these issues. If evidence is objected to at the trial on the ground that
it is not within the issues made by the pleadings, the court may allow the
pleadings to be amended and shall do so freely when the presentation of the
merits of the action will be subserved thereby and the objecting party fails to
satisfy the court that the admission of such evidence would prejudice the party in
maintaining the party’s action or defense upon the merits. The court may grant a
continuance to enable the objecting party to meet such evidence. An amendment
shall not be refused under subdivision (a) and (b) of this rule solely because it
adds a claim or defense, changes a claim or defense, or works a complete
change in parties. The Court is to be liberal in granting permission to amend
when justice so requires.
(c) Relation back of amendments. An amendment of a pleading relates
back to the date of the original pleading when
(1) relation back is permitted by the law that provides the statute of
limitations applicable to the action, or
(2) the claim or defense asserted in the amended pleading arose out of
the conduct, transaction, or occurrence set forth or attempted to be set forth in
the original pleading, except as may be otherwise provided in Rule 13(c) for
counterclaims maturing or acquired after pleading, or
(3) the amendment, other than one naming a party under the party’s true
name after having been initially sued under a fictitious name, changes the party
or the naming of the party against whom a claim is asserted if the foregoing
provision (2) is satisfied and, within the applicable period of limitations or one
hundred twenty (120) days of the commencement of the action, whichever
comes later, the party to be brought in by amendment (A) has received such
notice of the institution of the action that the party will not be prejudiced in
maintaining a defense on the merits, and (B) knew or should have known that,
but for a mistake concerning the identity of the proper party, the action would
have been brought against the party, or
(4) relation back is permitted by principles applicable to fictitious party
practice pursuant to Rule 9(h).
(d) Supplemental pleadings. Upon motion of a party the court may, upon
reasonable notice and upon such terms as are just, permit the party to serve a
supplemental pleading setting forth transactions or occurrences or events which
have happened since the date of the pleading sought to be supplemented.
Permission may be granted even though the original pleading is defective in its
statement of a claim for relief or defense. If the court deems it advisable that the
adverse party plead to the supplemental pleading, it shall so order, specifying the
time therefor.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 15 applies in the district courts except that the
ten- (10-) day time limit in Rule 15(a) is reduced to seven (7) days.