Rule 52.
Findings by the court; judgment on partial findings.
(a) Effect. In all actions tried upon the facts without a jury or with an
advisory jury, the court may upon written request and shall when required by
statute, find the facts specially and state separately its conclusions of law
thereon, and judgment shall be entered pursuant to Rule 58; and in granting or
refusing interlocutory injunctions the court may similarly set forth the findings of
fact and conclusions of law which constitute the grounds of its action. Requests
for findings are not necessary for purposes of review. Where the court makes
findings of fact based upon determinations of credibility drawn from its
observation of witnesses, those findings shall not be set aside unless clearly
erroneous, and due regard shall be given to the opportunity of the trial court to
judge of the credibility of the witnesses. If an opinion or memorandum of decision
is filed, it will be sufficient if the findings of fact and conclusions of law appear
therein. Findings of fact and conclusions of law are unnecessary on decisions of
motions under Rules 12 or 56 or any other motion except as provided in Rule
41(b).
(b) Amendment. Upon motion of a party filed not later than thirty (30) days
after judgment or entry of findings and conclusions the court may amend its
findings or make additional findings or may amend the judgment accordingly. The
motion may be made with a motion for a new trial pursuant to Rule 59. When
findings of fact are made in actions tried by the court without a jury, the question
of the sufficiency of the evidence to support the findings may thereafter be raised
whether or not the party raising the question has made in the court an objection
to such findings or has made a motion to amend them or a motion for judgment
or a motion for a new trial.
(c) Judgment on partial findings. If during a trial without a jury a party has
been fully heard on an issue and the court finds against the party on that issue,
the court may enter judgment against that party with respect to a claim or
defense that cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated without
a favorable finding on that issue, or the court may decline to render any judgment
until the close of all the evidence. Such a judgment may be supported by findings
of fact and conclusions of law.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 52 applies in the district courts except that the
time period of thirty (30) days in Rule 52(b) is reduced to fourteen (14) days in all
cases except unlawful-detainer actions subject to appeal under §6-6-350, Ala.
Code 1975, and eviction actions subject to appeal under § 35-9A-461, Ala. Code
1975, in which actions the time period is reduced to seven (7) calendar days.