Rule 51.
Instructions to jury: Objection.
At the close of the evidence or at such earlier time during the trial as the
court reasonably directs, any party may file and, in such event, shall serve on all
opposing parties written requests that the court instruct the jury on the law as set
forth in the requests. The court shall inform counsel of its proposed action upon
the requests prior to their arguments to the jury, but the court shall instruct the
jury after the arguments are completed. The judge shall write “given” or “refused”
as the case may be, on the request which thereby becomes a part of the record.
Those requests marked “given” shall be read to the jury without reference as to
which party filed the request. Neither the pleadings nor “given” written
instructions shall go into the jury room. Every oral charge shall be taken down by
the court reporter as it is delivered to the jury. The refusal of a requested, written
instruction, although a correct statement of the law, shall not be cause for
reversal on appeal if it appears that the same rule of law was substantially and
fairly given to the jury in the court’s oral charge or in charges given at the request
of the parties. No party may assign as error the giving or failing to give a written
instruction, or the giving of an erroneous, misleading, incomplete, or otherwise
improper oral charge unless that party objects thereto before the jury retires to
consider its verdict, stating the matter objected to and the grounds of the
objection. Submission of additional explanatory instructions shall not be required
unless requested by the court. Additional instructions shall be submitted in
writing, except that with respect to any additional instruction taken from Alabama
Pattern Jury Instructions, it shall be sufficient to identify said instruction on the
record by reference to the number and title of said pattern jury instruction.
Opportunity shall be given to make the objection out of the hearing of the jury. In
charging the jury, the court shall not express its opinion of the evidence.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 51 does not apply in the district courts.