Rule 9.
Pleading special matters.
(a) Capacity. It is not necessary to aver the capacity of a party to sue or be
sued or the authority of a party to sue or be sued in a representative capacity or
the legal existence of an organized association of persons that is made a party.
When a party desires to raise an issue as to the legal existence of any party or
the capacity of any party to sue or be sued or the authority of a party to sue or be
sued in a representative capacity, the party desiring to raise the issue shall do so
by specific negative averment, which shall include such supporting particulars as
are peculiarly within the pleader’s knowledge.
(b) Fraud, mistake, condition of the mind. In all averments of fraud or
mistake, the circumstances constituting fraud or mistake shall be stated with
particularity. Malice, intent, knowledge, and other condition of mind of a person
may be averred generally.
(c) Conditions precedent. In pleading the performance or occurrence of
conditions precedent, it is sufficient to aver generally that all conditions precedent
have been performed or have occurred. A denial of performance or occurrence
shall be made specifically and with particularity.
(d) Official document or act; ordinance or special statute. In pleading an
official document or official act it is sufficient to aver that the document was
issued or the act done in compliance with law. In pleading an ordinance of a
municipal corporation or a special or local or private statute or any right derived
therefrom, it is sufficient to refer to the ordinance or statute by its title and the
date of its approval, and the court shall take judicial notice thereof.
(e) Judgment. In pleading a judgment or decision of a domestic or foreign
court, judicial or quasi-judicial tribunal, or of a board or officer, it is sufficient to
aver the judgment or decision without setting forth matter showing jurisdiction to
render it.
(f) Time and place. For the purpose of testing the sufficiency of a pleading,
averments of time and place are material and shall be considered like all other
averments of material matter.
(g) Special damage. When items of special damage are claimed, they
shall be specifically stated.
(h) Fictitious parties. When a party is ignorant of the name of an opposing
party and so alleges in the party’s pleading, the opposing party may be
designated by any name, and when that party’s true name is discovered, the
process and all pleadings and proceedings in the action may be amended by
substituting the true name.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 9 applies in the district courts.