Rule 13.
Counterclaim and cross-claim.
(a) Compulsory counterclaims. A pleading shall state as a counterclaim
any claim which at the time of serving the pleading the pleader has against any
opposing party, if it arises out of the transaction or occurrence that is the subject
matter of the opposing party’s claim and does not require for its adjudication the
presence of third parties of whom the court cannot acquire jurisdiction. But the
pleader need not state the claim if: (1) at the time the action was commenced the
claim was the subject of another pending action; or (2) the opposing party
brought suit upon his claim by attachment or other process by which the court did
not acquire jurisdiction to render a personal judgment on that claim, and the
pleader is not stating any counterclaim under this Rule 13; or (3) the opposing
party’s claim is for damage covered by a liability insurance policy under which the
insurer has the right or the obligation to conduct the defense. In the event an
otherwise compulsory counterclaim is not asserted in reliance upon any
exception stated in paragraph (a), relitigation of the claim may be barred by the
doctrines of res judicata or collateral estoppel by judgment in the event certain
issues are determined adversely to the party electing not to assert the claim.
(b) Permissive counterclaims. A pleading may state as a counterclaim any
claim against an opposing party not arising out of the transaction or occurrence
that is the subject matter of the opposing party’s claim.
(c) Counterclaim exceeding opposing claim. A counterclaim may or may
not diminish or defeat the recovery sought by the opposing party. It may claim
relief exceeding in amount or different in kind from that sought in the pleading of
the opposing party. All counterclaims other than those maturing or acquired after
pleading shall relate back to the time the original plaintiff’s claim arose.
(d) Counterclaim against the State of Alabama. These rules shall not be
construed to enlarge beyond the limits now fixed by law the right to assert
counterclaims or to claim credits against the State of Alabama or an officer or
agency thereof.
(e) Counterclaim maturing or acquired after pleading. A claim which either
matured or was acquired by the pleader after serving a pleading may, with the
permission of the court, be presented as a counterclaim by supplemental
pleading.
(f) Omitted counterclaim. When a pleader fails to set up a counterclaim
through oversight, inadvertence, or excusable neglect, or when justice requires,
the pleader may by leave of court set up the counterclaim by amendment.
(g) Cross-claim against co-party. A pleading may state as a cross-claim
any claim by one party against a co-party arising out of the transaction or
occurrence that is the subject matter either of the original action or of a
counterclaim therein or relating to any property that is the subject matter of the
original action. Such cross-claim may include a claim that the party against whom
it is asserted is or may be liable to the cross-claimant for all or part of a claim
asserted in the action against the cross-claimant.
(h) Joinder of additional parties. Persons other than those made parties to
the original action may be made parties to a counterclaim or cross-claim in
accordance with the provisions of Rules 19 and 20.
(i) Separate trials; separate judgments. If the court orders separate trials
as provided in Rule 42(b), judgment on a counterclaim or cross-claim may be
rendered in accordance with the terms of Rule 54(b) when the court has
jurisdiction so to do, even if the claims of the opposing party have been
dismissed or otherwise disposed of.
(j) Appealed actions. Where an action is commenced in a court from which
an appeal lies to the circuit court for a trial de novo any counterclaim made
compulsory by subdivision (a) of this rule shall be stated as an amendment to the
pleading within thirty (30) days after the appeal has been perfected to the circuit
court or within such further time as the court may allow; and other counterclaims
and cross-claims shall be permitted as in an original action. When a counterclaim
or cross-claim is asserted by a defendant in an appealed case, the defendant
shall not be limited in amount to the jurisdiction of the lower court but shall be
permitted to claim and recover the full amount of its claim irrespective of the
jurisdiction of the lower court. If the plaintiff appeals a case to the circuit court
from a lower court and obtains a trial de novo in the circuit court, the plaintiff shall
be limited in the amount of his recovery to the jurisdictional amount that could
have been claimed and recovered in the lower court, unless the defendant
asserts a counterclaim in excess of the jurisdictional amount of the lower court. If
a defendant appeals to the circuit court from a judgment rendered by a lower
court, the plaintiff in the circuit court on a trial de novo shall be permitted to claim
and recover the full amount of its claim even though the amount might exceed
the jurisdiction of the lower court. For purposes of this Rule 13(j), the word
“appeal” includes petition for writ of certiorari.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 13 applies in the district court except that, (1)
Rule 13(a) is modified so as to excuse the pleader from asserting a compulsory
counterclaim when the claim is beyond the jurisdiction of the district courts and,
(2) Rule 13(j), Appealed Actions, is deleted.