Rule 14.
Third-party practice.
(a) When defendant may bring in third party. At any time after
commencement of the action a defending party, as a third-party plaintiff, may
cause a summons and complaint to be served upon a person not a party to the
action who is or may be liable to the third-party plaintiff for all or part of the
plaintiff’s claim against the third-party plaintiff. The third-party plaintiff need not
obtain leave to make the service if the third-party plaintiff files the third-party
complaint not later than ten (10) days after serving the original answer.
Otherwise the third-party plaintiff must obtain leave on motion upon notice to all
parties to the action. The person served with the summons and third-party
complaint, hereinafter called the third-party defendant, shall make any defenses
to the third-party plaintiff’s claim as provided in Rule 12 and any counterclaims
against the third-party plaintiff and cross-claims against other third-party
defendants as provided in Rule 13. The third-party defendant may assert against
the plaintiff any defenses which the third-party plaintiff has to the plaintiff’s claim.
The third-party defendant may also assert any claim against the plaintiff arising
out of the transaction or occurrence that is the subject matter of the plaintiff’s
claim against the third-party plaintiff. The plaintiff may assert any claim against
the third-party defendant arising out of the transaction or occurrence that is the
subject matter of the plaintiff’s claim against the third-party plaintiff, and the
plaintiff’s failure to do so shall have the effect of the failure to state a claim in a
pleading under Rule 13(a). The third-party defendant thereupon shall assert any
defenses as provided in Rule 12 and any counter-claims and cross-claims as
provided in Rule 13. Any party may move to strike the third-party claim, or for its
severance or separate trial. A third-party defendant may proceed under this rule
against any person not a party to the action who is or may be liable to the third-
party defendant for all or part of the claim made in the action against the third-
party defendant.
(b) When plaintiff may bring in third party. When a counterclaim is
asserted against a plaintiff, the plaintiff may cause a third party to be brought in
under circumstances which under this rule would entitle a defendant to do so.
(c) [Omitted.]
(dc) District court rule. Rule 14 applies in the district courts to actions
which are not on the small claims docket.