Rule 36.
Requests for admission.
(a) Request for admission. A party may serve upon any other party a
written request for the admission, for purposes of the pending action only, of the
truth of any matters within the scope of Rule 26(b) set forth in the request that
relate to statements or opinions of fact or of the application of law to fact,
including the genuineness of any documents described in the request. Copies of
documents shall be served with the request unless they have been or are
otherwise furnished or made available for inspection and copying. The request
may, without leave of court, be served upon the plaintiff after commencement of
the action and upon any other party with or after service of the summons and
complaint upon that party.
Each matter of which an admission is requested shall be separately set
forth. The matter is admitted unless, within thirty (30) days after service of the
request, or within such shorter or longer time as the court may allow, the party to
whom the request is directed serves upon the party requesting the admission a
written answer or objection addressed to the matter, signed by the party or by the
party’s attorney, but, unless the court shortens the time, a defendant shall not be
required to serve answers or objections before the expiration of forty-five (45)
days after service of the summons and complaint upon that defendant. If
objection is made, the reasons therefor shall be stated. The answer shall
specifically deny the matter or set forth in detail the reasons why the answering
party cannot truthfully admit or deny the matter. A denial shall fairly meet the
substance of the requested admission, and when good faith requires that a party
qualify an answer or deny only a part of the matter of which an admission is
requested, the party shall specify so much of it as is true and qualify or deny the
remainder. An answering party may not give lack of information or knowledge as
a reason for failure to admit or deny unless the party states that the party has
made reasonable inquiry and that the information known or readily obtainable by
the party is insufficient to enable the party to admit or deny. A party who
considers that a matter of which an admission has been requested presents a
genuine issue for trial may not, on that ground alone, object to the request; the
party may, subject to the provisions of Rule 37(c), deny the matter or set forth
reasons why the party cannot admit or deny it.
The party who has requested the admissions may move to determine the
sufficiency of the answers or objections. Unless the court determines that an
objection is justified, it shall order that an answer be served. If the court
determines that an answer does not comply with the requirements of this rule, it
may order either that the matter is admitted or that an amended answer be
served. The court may, in lieu of these orders, determine that final disposition of
the request be made at a pretrial conference or at a designated time prior to trial.
The provisions of Rule 37(a)(4) apply to the award of expenses incurred in
relation to the motion.
(b) Effect of admission. Any matter admitted under this rule is conclusively
established unless the court on motion permits withdrawal or amendment of the
admission. Subject to the provisions of Rule 16 governing amendment of a
pretrial order, the court may permit withdrawal or amendment when the
presentation of the merits of the action will be subserved thereby and the party
who obtained the admission fails to satisfy the court that withdrawal or
amendment will prejudice that party in maintaining the action or defense on the
merits. Any admission made by a party under this rule is for the purpose of the
pending action only and is not an admission for any other purpose nor may it be
used against the party in any other proceeding.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 36 applies in the district courts in those instances
where a request for admissions is permitted by Rule 26(dc).