Rule 26.
General provisions governing discovery.
(a) Discovery methods. Parties may obtain discovery by one or more of
the following methods: depositions upon oral examination or written questions;
written interrogatories; production of documents or things or permission to enter
upon land or other property, for inspection and other purposes; physical and
mental examinations; and requests for admission.
(b) Discovery scope and limits. Unless otherwise limited by order of the
court in accordance with these rules, the scope of discovery is as follows:
(1) IN GENERAL. Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not
privileged, which is: (i) relevant to the subject matter involved in the
pending action, whether it relates to the claim or defense of the party
seeking discovery or to the claim or defense of any other party; and (ii)
proportional to the needs of the case, considering the importance of
the issues at stake in the action, the amount in controversy, the parties'
relative access to relevant information, the parties' resources, the
importance of the discovery in resolving the issues, and whether the
burden or expense of the proposed discovery outweighs its likely
benefit. It is not ground for objection that the information sought will be
inadmissible at the trial if the information sought appears reasonably
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.
(2) LIMITATIONS.
(A) A party need not provide discovery of electronically stored
information from sources that the party identifies to the requesting
party as not reasonably accessible because of undue burden or
cost. On motion to compel discovery or for a protective order, the
party from whom discovery is sought must show that the
information is not reasonably accessible because of undue burden
or cost. If that showing is made, the court may nonetheless order
discovery from such sources if the requesting party shows good
cause for compelling the discovery, considering the limitations of
subdivision (b)(2)(B) of this rule. The court may specify conditions
for such discovery.
(B) The frequency or extent of use of the discovery methods set forth
in subdivision (a) shall be limited by the court if it determines: (i)
that the discovery sought is unreasonably cumulative or
duplicative, or is obtainable from some other source that is more
convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive; (ii) that the
party seeking discovery has had ample opportunity by discovery
in the action to obtain the information sought; or (iii) that the
proposed discovery is outside the scope permitted by Rule
26(b)(1). The court may act upon its own initiative after
reasonable notice or pursuant to a motion under subdivision (c).
(3) INSURANCE AGREEMENTS. A party may obtain discovery of the existence
and contents of any insurance agreement under which any person
carrying on an insurance business may be liable to satisfy part or all of
a judgment that may be entered in the action or to indemnify or
reimburse for payments made to satisfy the judgment. Information
concerning the insurance agreement is not by reason of disclosure
admissible in evidence at trial. For purposes of this paragraph, an
application for insurance shall not be treated as part of an insurance
agreement.
(4) TRIAL PREPARATION: MATERIALS. Subject to the provisions of subdivision
(b)(5) of this rule, a party may obtain discovery of documents and
tangible things otherwise discoverable under subdivision (b)(1) of this
rule and prepared in anticipation of litigation or for trial by or for another
party or by or for that other party's representative (including the other
party's attorney, consultant, surety, indemnitor, insurer, or agent) only
upon a showing that the party seeking discovery has substantial need
of the materials in the preparation of the party's case and that the party
is unable without undue hardship to obtain the substantial equivalent of
the materials by other means. In ordering discovery of such materials
when the required showing has been made, the court shall protect
against disclosure of the mental impressions, conclusions, opinions, or
legal theories of an attorney or other representative of a party
concerning the litigation.
A party may obtain without the required showing a statement
concerning the action or its subject matter previously made by that
party. Upon request, a person not a party may obtain without the
required showing a statement concerning the action or its subject
matter previously made by that person. If the request is refused, the
person may move for a court order. The provisions of Rule 37(a)(4)
apply to the award of expenses incurred in relation to the motion. For
purposes of this paragraph, a statement previously made is (A) a
written statement signed or otherwise adopted or approved by the
person making it, or (B) a stenographic, mechanical, electrical, or other
recording, or a transcription thereof, which is a substantially verbatim
recital of an oral statement by the person making it and
contemporaneously recorded.
(5) TRIAL PREPARATION: EXPERTS. Discovery of facts known and opinions
held by experts, otherwise discoverable under the provisions of
subdivision (b)(1) of this rule and acquired or developed in anticipation
of litigation or for trial, may be obtained only as follows:
(A1) (i) A party may through interrogatories require any other party to
identify each person whom the other party expects to call as an
expert witness at trial, to state the subject matter on which the
expert is expected to testify, and to state the substance of the facts
and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify and a
summary of the grounds for each opinion.
(ii) Upon motion, the court may order further discovery by other
means, subject to such restrictions as to scope and such
provisions, pursuant to subdivision (b)(5)(C) of this rule, concerning
fees and expenses as the court may deem appropriate.
(B) A party may discover facts known or opinions held by an expert
who has been retained, specially employed or assigned by another
party in anticipation of litigation or preparation for trial and who is
not expected to be called as a witness at trial, only as provided in
Rule 35(b) or upon a showing of exceptional circumstances under
which it is impracticable for the party seeking discovery to obtain
facts or opinions on the same subject by other means.
(C) Unless manifest injustice would result, (i) the court shall require
that the party seeking discovery pay the expert a reasonable fee for
time spent in responding to discovery under subdivisions
(b)(5)(A)(ii) and (b)(5)(B) of this rule; and (ii) with respect to
discovery obtained under subdivision (b)(5)(A)(ii) of this rule the
court may require, and with respect to discovery obtained under
subdivision (b)(5)(B) of this rule the court shall require, the party
seeking discovery to pay the other party a fair portion of the fees
and expenses reasonably incurred by the latter party in obtaining
facts and opinions from the expert.
(6) CLAIMS OF PRIVILEGE OR PROTECTION OF TRIAL-PREPARATION MATERIALS.
(A) When a party withholds information otherwise discoverable under
these rules on a claim that it is privileged or subject to protection as
trial-preparation materials, the claim shall be made expressly and,
upon written request by any other party, shall be supported by a
description of the nature of the documents, communications, or
things not produced sufficient to enable the demanding party to
contest the claim. This supporting description shall be served within
twenty-one (21) days of the date a request is served, unless
otherwise ordered.
(B) If information is produced in discovery that is subject to a claim of
privilege or of protection as trial-preparation material, the party
making the claim may notify any party that received the information
of the claim and the basis for it. After being notified, a party must
promptly return, sequester, or destroy the specified information and
any copies it has and may not use or disclose the information until
the claim is resolved. Either party may promptly present the
information to the court under seal for a determination of the claim.
If the receiving party disclosed the information before being notified,
it must take reasonable steps to retrieve it. The producing party
must preserve the information until the claim is resolved.
(c) Protective Orders. Upon motion by a party or by the person from whom
discovery is sought, and for good cause shown, the court in which the action is
pending or, alternatively, on matters relating to a deposition or production or
inspection, the court in the circuit where the deposition or production or
inspection is to be taken may make any order that justice requires to protect a
party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden
or expense, including one or more of the following: (1) that the discovery not be
had; (2) that the discovery may be had only on specified terms and conditions,
including a designation of the time or place or the allocation of expenses for the
discovery; (3) that the discovery may be had only by a method of discovery other
than that selected by the party seeking discovery; (4) that certain matters not be
inquired into or that the scope of the discovery be limited to certain matters; (5)
that discovery be conducted with no one present except persons designated by
the court; (6) that a deposition after being sealed be opened only by order of the
court; (7) that a trade secret or other confidential research, development, or
commercial information not be disclosed or be disclosed only in a designated
way; (8) that the parties simultaneously file specified documents or information
enclosed in sealed envelopes to be opened as directed by the court. A motion for
a protective order shall be accompanied by a statement of the attorney for the
moving party stating that the attorney, before filing the motion, has endeavored to
resolve the subject of the discovery motion through correspondence or
discussions with opposing counsel or, if the opposing party is not represented by
counsel, with the opposing party.
If the motion for a protective order is denied in whole or in part, the court
may, on such terms and conditions as are just, order that any party or person
provide or permit discovery. The provisions of Rule 37(a)(4) apply to the award
of expenses incurred in relation to the motion.
(d) Sequence and timing of discovery. Unless the court upon motion, for
the convenience of parties and witnesses and in the interests of justice, orders
otherwise, methods of discovery may be used in any sequence and the fact that
a party is conducting discovery, whether by deposition or otherwise, shall not
operate to delay any other party's discovery.
(e) Supplementation of responses. A party who has responded to a
request for discovery with a response that was complete when made is under no
duty to supplement the response to include information thereafter acquired,
except as follows:
(1) A party is under a duty seasonably to supplement the response with
respect to any question directly addressed to (A) the identity and
location of persons having knowledge of discoverable matters, and (B)
the identity of each person expected to be called as an expert witness
at trial, the subject matter on which the expert witness is expected to
testify, and the substance of the witness's testimony.
(2) A party is under a duty seasonably to amend a prior response if the
party obtains information upon the basis of which the party (A) knows
that the response was incorrect when made, or (B) knows that the
response, though correct when made, is no longer true and the
circumstances are such that a failure to amend the response is in
substance a knowing concealment.
(3) A duty to supplement responses may be imposed by order of the court,
agreement of the parties, or at any time prior to trial through new
requests for supplementation of prior responses.
(f) Discovery conference. At any time after commencement of an action
the court may direct the attorneys for the parties to appear before it for a
conference on the subject of discovery. If discovery of electronically stored
information will be sought, any party may request, or the court may on its own
order, that the parties confer regarding any issues relating to discovery of
electronically stored information, including issues relating to preserving
discoverable information; issues relating to the form or forms in which the
electronically stored information should be produced; and issues relating to
claims of privilege or of protection of material as trial-preparation material,
including, if the parties agree on a procedure to assert such claims after
production of the material, whether to ask the court to include their agreement in
an order. Following the discovery conference, the court may enter an order
tentatively identifying the issues for discovery purposes, establishing a plan and
schedule for discovery, setting limitations on discovery, if any; and determining
such other matters, including the allocation of expenses, as are necessary for the
proper management of discovery in the action. An order may be altered or
amended whenever justice so requires.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 26 applies in the district courts except that the
reference to physical and mental examinations is deleted and all other discovery
methods referred to in Rule 26(a) shall be available only in the discretion of the
court on motion of the party seeking such discovery or by agreement of the
parties. Unless the parties agree otherwise, in no event shall the court order a
deposition on oral examination or on written questions except when the witness
will not be available to testify at the trial.