Rule 38.
Jury trial of right.
(a) Right Preserved. The right of trial by jury as declared by the
Constitution of Alabama or as given by a statute of this State shall be preserved
to the parties inviolate.
(b) Demand. Any party may demand a trial by jury of any issue triable of
right by a jury by serving upon the other parties a demand therefor in writing at
any time after the commencement of the action and not later than thirty (30) days
after the service of the last pleading directed to such issue. Such demand may
be indorsed upon a pleading of the party, and such demand shall be deemed to
be a demand for a struck jury.
In all actions in the circuit court brought by appeal or certiorari from any
judgment of an inferior court, the party filing the notice of appeal or action for writ
of certiorari may demand a trial by jury of any issue, triable of right by a jury, by
serving upon the other parties a demand therefor in writing not later than ten (10)
days after filing said notice or petition; and any other party may demand a trial by
jury of any issue triable of right by a jury by, not more than ten (10) days after
that party has been served with such notice of appeal or petition for writ of
certiorari, serving upon the remaining parties a demand therefor in writing. Such
demand may be indorsed upon said notice or petition or other pleading of the
party.
(c) Same: Specification of issues. In the demand a party may specify the
issues which the party wishes so tried; otherwise, the party shall be deemed to
have demanded trial by jury for all the issues so triable. If the party has
demanded trial by jury for only some of the issues, any other party within ten (10)
days after service of the demand or such lesser time as the court may order, may
serve a demand for trial by jury of any other or all of the issues of fact in the
action.
(d) Waiver. The failure of a party to serve a demand as required by this
rule and to file it as required by Rule 5(d) constitutes a waiver by the party of trial
by jury. A demand for trial by jury made as herein provided may not be withdrawn
without the consent of the parties except where an opposing party is in default
under Rule 55(a). The failure to appear, in person or by counsel, at the trial is a
waiver of trial by jury. A party seeking affirmative relief may withdraw that party’s
demand for a jury as to any defaulting party without the consent of that party and
have that party’s damages assessed by the court without a jury.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 38 does not apply in the district courts.