Rule 41.
Dismissal of actions.
(a) Voluntary dismissal: Effect thereof.
(1) BY PLAINTIFF; BY STIPULATION. Subject to the provisions of Rule 23(e), of
Rule 66, and of any statute of this state, an action may be dismissed by the
plaintiff without order of court (i) by filing a notice of dismissal at any time before
service by the adverse party of an answer or of a motion for summary judgment,
whichever first occurs, or (ii) by filing a stipulation of dismissal signed by all
parties who have appeared in the action. Unless otherwise stated in the notice of
dismissal or stipulation, the dismissal is without prejudice, except that a notice of
dismissal operates as an adjudication upon the merits when filed by a plaintiff
who has once dismissed in any court of Alabama, or of the United States, or of
any state, an action based on or including the same claim.
(2) BY ORDER OF COURT. Except as provided in paragraph (1) of this
subdivision of this rule, an action shall not be dismissed at the plaintiff’s instance
save upon order of the court and upon such terms and conditions as the court
deems proper. If a counterclaim has been pleaded by a defendant prior to the
service upon the defendant of the plaintiff’s motion to dismiss, the action may be
dismissed but the counterclaim shall remain pending for adjudication by the
court. Unless otherwise specified in the order, a dismissal under this paragraph is
without prejudice.
(b) Involuntary dismissal: Effect thereof. For failure of the plaintiff to
prosecute or to comply with these rules or any order of court, a defendant may
move for dismissal of an action or of any claim against the defendant. Unless the
court in its order for dismissal otherwise specifies, a dismissal under this
subdivision and any dismissal not provided for in this rule, other than a dismissal
for lack of jurisdiction, for improper venue, or for failure to join a party under Rule
19, operates as an adjudication upon the merits.
(c) Dismissal of counterclaim, cross-claim or third-party claim. The
provisions of this rule apply to the dismissal of any counterclaim, cross-claim, or
third-party claim. A voluntary dismissal by the claimant alone pursuant to
paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of this rule shall be made before a responsive
pleading is served or, if there is none, before the introduction of evidence at the
trial or hearing.
(d) Costs of previously dismissed action. If a plaintiff who has once
dismissed an action in any court commences an action based upon or including
the same claim against the same defendant, the court may make such order for
the payment of costs of the action previously dismissed as it may deem proper
and may stay the proceedings in the action until the plaintiff has complied with
the order.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 41 applies in the district courts, except that the
references to Rule 23(e) and Rule 66 at Rule 41(a)(1) are deleted.