Rule 23.
Class actions.
(a) Prerequisites to a class action. One or more members of a class may
sue or be sued as representative parties on behalf of all only if (1) the class is so
numerous that joinder of all members is impracticable, (2) there are questions of
law or fact common to the class, (3) the claims or defenses of the representative
parties are typical of the claims or defenses of the class, and (4) the
representative parties will fairly and adequately protect the interests of the class.
(b) Class actions maintainable. An action may be maintained as a class
action if the prerequisites of subdivision (a) are satisfied, and in addition:
(1) the prosecution of separate actions by or against individual members
of the class would create a risk of
(A) inconsistent or varying adjudications with respect to individual
members of the class which would establish incompatible standards of
conduct for the party opposing the class, or
(B) adjudications with respect to individual members of the class which
would as a practical matter be dispositive of the interests of the other
members not parties to the adjudications or substantially impair or
impede their ability to protect their interests; or
(2) the party opposing the class has acted or refused to act on grounds
generally applicable to the class, thereby making appropriate final
injunctive relief or corresponding declaratory relief with respect to the
class as a whole; or
(3) the court finds that the questions of law or fact common to the
members of the class predominate over any questions affecting only
individual members, and that a class action is superior to other available
methods for the fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy. The
matters pertinent to the findings include: (A) the interest of members of the
class in individually controlling the prosecution or defense of separate
actions; (B) the extent and nature of any litigation concerning the
controversy already commenced by or against members of the class; (C)
the desirability or undesirability of concentrating the litigation of the claims
in the particular forum; (D) the difficulties likely to be encountered in the
management of a class action.
(c) Determination by order whether class action to be maintained; notice;
judgment; actions conducted partially as class actions.
(1) At an early practicable time, consistent with Alabama statutory law, the
court shall determine by order whether an action brought as a class action
is to be so maintained. An order that grants or denies class certification
may be altered or amended before final judgment.
(2) For any class certified under Rule 23(b)(1) or (b)(2), the court may
direct appropriate notice to the class. For any class certified under Rule
23(b)(3) -- or upon ordering notice under Rule 23(e) to a class proposed to
be certified for purposes of settlement under Rule 23(b)(3) -- the court
must direct to class members the best notice that is practicable under the
circumstances, including individual notice to all members who can be
identified through reasonable effort. The notice may be by one or more of
the following: United States mail, electronic means, or other appropriate
means. The notice shall advise each member that (A) the court will
exclude the member from the class if the member so requests by a
specified date; (B) the judgment, whether favorable or not, will include all
members who do not request exclusion; and (C) any member who does
not request exclusion may, if the member desires, enter an appearance
through counsel.
(3) The judgment in an action maintained as a class action under
subdivision (b)(1) or (b)(2), whether or not favorable to the class, shall
include and describe those whom the court finds to be members of the
class. The judgment in an action maintained as a class action under
subdivision (b)(3), whether or not favorable to the class, shall include and
specify or describe those to whom the notice provided in subdivision (c)(2)
was directed, and who have not requested exclusion, and whom the court
finds to be members of the class.
(4) When appropriate (A) an action may be brought or maintained as a
class action with respect to particular issues, or (B) a class may be divided
into subclasses and each subclass treated as a class, and the provisions
of this rule shall then be construed and applied accordingly.
(d) Orders in conduct of actions. In the conduct of actions to which this
rule applies, the court may make appropriate orders: (1) determining the course
of proceedings or prescribing measures to prevent undue repetition or
complication in the presentation of evidence or argument; (2) requiring, for the
protection of the members of the class or otherwise for the fair conduct of the
action, that notice be given in such manner as the court may direct to some or all
of the members of any step in the action, or of the proposed extent of the
judgment, or of the opportunity of members to signify whether they consider the
representation fair and adequate, to intervene and present claims or defenses, or
otherwise to come into the action; (3) imposing conditions on the representative
parties or on intervenors; (4) requiring that the pleadings be amended to
eliminate therefrom allegations as to representation of absent persons, and that
the action proceed accordingly; (5) dealing with similar procedural matters. The
orders may be combined with an order under Rule 16, and may be altered or
amended as may be desirable from time to time.
(e) Settlement, voluntary dismissal or compromise. The claims, issues, or
defenses of a certified class -- or a class proposed to be certified for purposes of
settlement -- may be settled, voluntarily dismissed, or compromised only with the
court's approval, and notice of the proposed dismissal or compromise shall be
given to all members of the class in such manner as the court directs.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 23 does not apply in the district courts.