Rule 27.
Discovery before action or pending appeal.
(a) Before action.
(1) PETITION. A person who desires to perpetuate that person’s own
testimony or that of another person or to obtain discovery under Rule 34 or Rule
35 regarding any matter that may be cognizable in any court of this state may file
a verified petition in the circuit court in the county of the residence of any
expected adverse party. The petition shall be entitled in the name of the
petitioner and shall show: (1) that the petitioner expects to be a party to an action
cognizable in a court of this state but is presently unable to bring it or cause it to
be brought, (2) the subject matter of the expected action and the petitioner’s
interest therein, (3) the facts which the petitioner desires to establish by the
proposed testimony and the petitioner’s reasons for desiring to perpetuate it, (4)
the names or a description of the persons the petitioner expects will be adverse
parties and their addresses so far as known, and (5) the names and addresses of
the persons to be examined and the substance of the testimony which the
petitioner expects to elicit from each, and shall ask for an order authorizing the
petitioner to take the depositions of the persons to be examined named in the
petition, for the purpose of perpetuating their testimony or to seek discovery
under Rule 34 or Rule 35 from the persons named in the petition.
(2) NOTICE AND SERVICE. The petitioner shall thereafter serve a notice
upon each person named in the petition as an expected adverse party, together
with a copy of the petition, stating that the petitioner will apply to the court, at a
time and place named therein, for the order described in the petition. At least
thirty (30) days before the date of hearing the notice shall be served in the
manner provided in Rule 4(c) for service of summons, but if such service cannot
with due diligence be made upon any expected adverse party named in the
petition, the court may make such order as is just for service by publication or
otherwise, and shall appoint, for persons not served in the manner provided in
Rule 4(c), an attorney who shall represent them, and, in case they are not
otherwise represented, shall cross-examine the deponent. If any expected
adverse party is a minor or incompetent the provisions of Rule 17(c) apply.
(3) ORDER AND EXAMINATION. If the court is satisfied that the perpetuation of
the testimony may prevent a failure or delay of justice, it shall make an order
designating or describing the persons whose depositions may be taken and
specifying the subject matter of the examination and whether the depositions
shall be taken upon oral examination or written questions; or shall make an order
designating or describing the persons from whom discovery may be sought
under Rule 34 and specifying the objects of such discovery; or shall make an
order for a physical or mental examination as provided in Rule 35(a). The
discovery may then be taken in accordance with these rules. For the purpose of
applying these rules to discovery before action, each reference therein to the
court in which the action is pending shall be deemed to refer to the court in which
the petition for such discovery was filed.
(4) USE OF DEPOSITION. If a deposition to perpetuate testimony is taken
under these rules or if, although not so taken, it would be admissible in evidence
in the courts of the state in which it is taken, it may be used in any action
involving the same subject matter subsequently brought in this state in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 32(a) and (b).
(b) Pending Appeal. If an appeal has been taken from a judgment of a
court to which these rules apply or before the taking of an appeal if the time
therefor has not expired, the court in which the judgment was rendered may
allow the taking of the depositions of witnesses to perpetuate their testimony or
may allow discovery under Rule 34 or Rule 35 for use in the event of further
proceedings in such court. In such case the party who desires to perpetuate the
testimony or obtain the discovery may make a motion in the court therefor upon
the same notice and service thereof as if the action was pending in the circuit
court. The motion shall show (1) the names and addresses of the persons to be
examined or from whom other discovery is sought and the substance of the
testimony or other discovery which the party expects to elicit from each; (2) the
reasons for perpetuating their testimony or seeking such other discovery. If the
court finds that the perpetuation of the testimony or other discovery is proper to
avoid a failure or delay of justice, it may make an order as provided in paragraph
(3) of subdivision (a) of this rule and thereupon discovery may be had and used
in the same manner and under the same conditions as are prescribed in these
rules for discovery in actions pending in the circuit court.
(c) Perpetuation by Action. This rule does not limit the power of a court to
entertain an action to perpetuate testimony.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 27 does not apply in the district court.