Rule 8.
General rules of pleading.
(a) Claims for relief. A pleading which sets forth a claim for relief, whether
an original claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party claim, shall contain (1)
a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to
relief, and (2) a demand for judgment for the relief the pleader seeks. Relief in
the alternative or of several different types may be demanded.
(b) Defenses; form of denials. A party shall state in short and plain terms
the party’s defenses to each claim asserted and shall admit or deny the
averments upon which the adverse party relies. If a party is without knowledge or
information sufficient to form a belief as to the truth of an averment, the party
shall so state, and this has the effect of a denial. Denials shall fairly meet the
substance of the averments denied. When a pleader intends in good faith to deny
only a part or a qualification of an averment, the party shall specify so much of it
as is true and material and shall deny only the remainder. Unless the pleader
intends in good faith to controvert all the averments of the preceding pleading,
the pleader may make denials as specific denials of designated averments or
paragraphs, or may generally deny all the averments except such designated
averments or paragraphs as the pleader expressly admits; but, when the pleader
does so intend to controvert all its averments, the pleader may do so by general
denial subject to the obligations set forth in Rule 11.
(c) Affirmative defenses. In pleading to a preceding pleading, a party shall
set forth affirmatively accord and satisfaction, arbitration and award, assumption
of risk, contributory negligence, discharge in bankruptcy, duress, estoppel, failure
of consideration, fraud, illegality, injury by fellow servant, laches, license,
payment, release, res judicata, statute of frauds, statute of limitations, waiver,
and any other matter constituting an avoidance or affirmative defense. When a
party has mistakenly designated a defense as a counterclaim or a counterclaim
as a defense, the court on terms, if justice so requires, shall treat the pleading as
if there had been a proper designation.
(d) Effect of failure to deny. Averments in a pleading to which a responsive
pleading is required, other than those as to the amount of damage, are admitted
when not denied in the responsive pleading. Averments in a pleading to which no
responsive pleading is required or permitted shall be taken as denied or avoided.
(e) Pleading to be concise and direct; consistency.
(1) Each averment of a pleading shall be simple, concise, and direct. No
technical forms of pleading or motions are required.
(2) A party may set forth two or more statements of a claim or defense
alternatively or hypothetically, either in one count or defense or in separate
counts or defenses. When two or more statements are made in the alternative
and one of them if made independently would be sufficient, the pleading is not
made insufficient by the insufficiency of one or more of the alternative
statements. A party may also state as many separate claims or defenses as the
party has regardless of consistency and whether based on legal or on equitable
grounds, or on both. All statements shall be made subject to the obligations set
forth in Rule 11.
(f) Construction of pleadings. All pleadings shall be so construed as to do
substantial justice.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 8 applies in the district courts.