Rule 55.
Default.
(a) Entry. When a party against whom a judgment for affirmative relief is
sought has failed to plead or otherwise defend as provided by these rules and
that fact is made to appear by affidavit or otherwise, the clerk shall enter the
party’s default. The clerk’s entry of default may be made electronically.
(b) Judgment. Judgment by default may be entered as follows:
(1) BY THE CLERK. When the plaintiff’s claim against a defendant is for a
sum certain or for a sum which can by computation be made certain, the clerk
upon request of the plaintiff and upon affidavit of the amount due shall enter
judgment for that amount and costs against the defendant, if the defendant has
been defaulted for failure to appear and if the defendant is not a minor or
incompetent person.
(2) BY THE COURT. In all other cases the party entitled to a judgment by
default shall apply to the court therefor; but no judgment by default shall be
entered (A) against a minor or (B) against an incompetent person, unless the
minor or the incompetent person is represented in the action by a general
guardian or other representative as provided in Rule 17(c) who has appeared
therein. If the party against whom judgment by default is sought has appeared in
the action, the court shall conduct a hearing on the application for judgment, and
the party (or, if appearing by representative, the party's representative) shall be
served with written notice of the application for judgment and the hearing thereon
at least three (3) days prior to the hearing on such application, provided,
however, that judgment by default may be entered by the court on the day the
case is set for trial without such three (3) days' notice. If, in order to enable the
court to enter judgment or to carry it into effect, it is necessary to take an account
or to determine the amount of damages or to establish the truth of any averment
by evidence or to make an investigation of any other matter, the court may
conduct such hearings or order such references as it deems necessary and
proper and shall accord a right of trial by jury pursuant to the provisions of Rule
38.
(c) Setting aside default. In its discretion, the court may set aside an entry
of default at any time before judgment. The court may on its own motion set
aside a judgment by default within thirty (30) days after the entry of the judgment.
The court may also set aside a judgment by default on the motion of a party filed
not later than thirty (30) days after the entry of the judgment.
(d) Plaintiffs, counterclaimants, cross-claimants. The provisions of this rule
apply whether the party entitled to the judgment by default is a plaintiff, a third-
party plaintiff, or a party who has pleaded a cross-claim or counterclaim. In all
cases a judgment by default is subject to the limitations of Rule 54(c).
(e) Proof required despite default in certain cases. No judgment by default
shall be entered against minors, incompetents, or parties to an action for divorce
or annulment of marriage unless the claimant establishes the party’s claim or
right to relief by evidence.
(dc) District Court Rule. Rule 55 applies in the district courts, except that
(1) the reference to a jury in Rule 55(b)(2) is deleted; (2) the time period of thirty
(30) days in Rule 55(c) is reduced to fourteen (14) days in all cases except for
unlawful-detainer actions subject to appeal under §6-6-350, Ala. Code 1975, and
actions for eviction as defined in §35-9A-141(5), Ala. Code 1975, in which
actions the thirty-(30-)day time period is reduced to seven (7) calendar days; (3)
the provisions dealing with an action for divorce or annulment of marriage at Rule
55(e) are deleted; and (4) a party shall not be deemed in default if the party has
served an appearance in the form of a motion to dismiss.