Rule 17.
Parties plaintiff and defendant; capacity.
(a) Real party in interest. Every action shall be prosecuted in the name of
the real party in interest. An executor, administrator, guardian, bailee, trustee of
an express trust, a party with whom or in whose name a contract has been made
for the benefit of another, or a party authorized by statute may sue in that
person’s own name without joining the party for whose benefit the action is
brought. No action shall be dismissed on the ground that it is not prosecuted in
the name of the real party in interest until a reasonable time has been allowed
after objection for ratification of commencement of the action by, or joinder or
substitution of, the real party in interest; and such ratification, joinder, or
substitution shall have the same effect as if the action had been commenced in
the name of the real party in interest.
(b) Capacity to sue or be sued. The capacity of a party, including one
acting in a representative capacity, to sue or be sued shall be determined by the
law of this state.
(c) Minors or incompetent persons. Whenever a minor has a
representative, such as a general guardian or like fiduciary, the representative
may sue in the name of the minor. Whenever an incompetent person has a
representative such as a general guardian or a like fiduciary, the representative
may sue or defend in the name of the incompetent person. If a minor or an
incompetent person does not have a duly appointed representative, that person
may sue by that person’s next friend. The court shall appoint a guardian ad litem
(1) for a minor defendant, or (2) for an incompetent person not otherwise
represented in an action and may make any other orders it deems proper for the
protection of the minor or incompetent person. When the interest of an infant
unborn or unconceived is before the court, the court may appoint a guardian ad
litem for such interest. Moreover, if a case occurs not provided for in these rules
in which a minor is or should be made a party defendant, or if service attempted
upon any minor is incomplete under these rules, the court may direct further
process to bring the minor into court or appoint a guardian ad litem for the minor
without service upon the minor or upon anyone for the minor.
(d) Guardian ad litem; how chosen. Whenever a guardian ad litem shall be
necessary, the court in which the action is pending shall appoint to serve in that
capacity some person who is qualified to represent the minor or incompetent
person in the capacity of an attorney or solicitor, and must not select or appoint
any person who is related, either by blood or marriage within the fourth degree,
to the plaintiff or the plaintiff’s attorney, or to the judge or clerk of the court, or
who is in any manner connected with such plaintiff or such plaintiff’s attorney, or
who has been suggested, nominated, or recommended by the plaintiff or the
plaintiff’s attorney or any person for the plaintiff. If the guardian ad litem is to be
appointed for a minor fourteen (14) years of age or over, such minor may, within
thirty (30) days after perfection of service upon the minor in such cause, have the
minor’s choice of a guardian ad litem to represent the minor in said cause
certified by an officer authorized to take acknowledgments, but if such minor fails
to nominate a guardian ad litem within the thirty- (30-) day period or before any
hearing set in the action, whichever is earlier, the court shall appoint a guardian
ad litem as before provided. In all cases in which a guardian ad litem is required,
the court must ascertain a reasonable fee or compensation to be allowed and
paid to such guardian ad litem for services rendered in such cause, to be taxed
as a part of the costs in such action, and which is to be paid when collected as
other costs in the action, to such guardian ad litem.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 17 applies in the district courts except that the
thirty- (30-) day time period in Rule 17(d) is reduced to fourteen (14) days.