Rule 56.
Summary judgment.
(a) For claimant. A party seeking to recover upon a claim, counterclaim, or
cross-claim or to obtain a declaratory judgment may, at any time after the
expiration of thirty (30) days from the commencement of the action or after
service of a motion for summary judgment by the adverse party, move with or
without supporting affidavits for a summary judgment in the party’s favor upon all
or any part thereof.
(b) For defending party. A party against whom a claim, counterclaim, or
cross-claim is asserted or a declaratory judgment is sought may, at any time,
move with or without supporting affidavits for a summary judgment in the party’s
favor as to all or any part thereof.
(c) Motion and proceedings thereon.
(1) FORM OF MOTION AND STATEMENT IN OPPOSITION THERETO. The motion
shall be supported by a narrative summary of what the movant contends to be
the undisputed material facts; that narrative summary may be set forth in the
motion or may be attached as an exhibit. The narrative summary shall be
supported by specific references to pleadings, portions of discovery materials, or
affidavits and may include citations to legal authority. Any supporting documents
that are not on file shall be attached as exhibits. If the opposing party contends
that material facts are in dispute, that party shall file and serve a statement in
opposition supported in the same manner as is provided herein for a summary of
undisputed material facts.
(2) TIME. The motion for summary judgment, with all supporting materials,
including any briefs, shall be served at least ten (10) days before the time fixed
for the hearing, except that a court may conduct a hearing on less than ten (10)
days’ notice with the consent of the parties concerned. Subject to subparagraph
(f) of this rule, any statement or affidavit in opposition shall be served at least two
(2) days prior to the hearing.
(3) JUDGMENT. The judgment sought shall be rendered forthwith if the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file,
together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of
law. A summary judgment, interlocutory in character, may be rendered on the
issue of liability alone although there is a genuine issue as to the amount of
damages.
(d) Case not fully adjudicated on motion. If on motion under this rule
judgment is not rendered upon the whole case or for all the relief asked and a
trial is necessary, the court at the hearing of the motion, by examining the
pleadings and the evidence before it and by interrogating counsel, shall if
practicable ascertain what material facts exist without substantial controversy
and what material facts are actually and in good faith controverted. It shall
thereupon make an order specifying the facts that appear without substantial
controversy, including the extent to which the amount of damages or other relief
is not in controversy, and directing such further proceedings in the action as are
just. Upon the trial of the action the facts so specified shall be deemed
established, and the trial shall be conducted accordingly.
(e) Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense required. Supporting and
opposing affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth such
facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the
affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. Sworn or certified
copies of all papers or parts thereof referred to in an affidavit shall be attached
thereto or served therewith. The court may permit affidavits to be supplemented
or opposed by depositions, answers to interrogatories, or further affidavits. When
a motion for summary judgment is made and supported as provided in this rule,
an adverse party may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of the
adverse party’s pleading, but the adverse party’s response, by affidavits or as
otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is
a genuine issue for trial. If the adverse party does not so respond, summary
judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered against him.
(f) When evidentiary matter is unavailable. Should it appear from the
affidavits of a party opposing the motion that the party cannot, for reasons stated,
present by affidavit facts essential to justify the party’s opposition, the court may
deny the motion for summary judgment or may order a continuance to permit
affidavits to be obtained or depositions to be taken or discovery to be had or may
make such other order as is just.
(g) Affidavits made in bad faith. Should it appear to the satisfaction of the
court at any time that any of the affidavits presented pursuant to this rule are
presented in bad faith or solely for the purpose of delay, the court shall forthwith
order the party employing them to pay to the other party the amount of the
reasonable expenses which the filing of the affidavits caused him to incur,
including reasonable attorney’s fees, and any offending party or attorney may be
adjudged guilty of contempt.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 56 applies in the district courts except that the
references to thirty (30) days and ten (10) days are reduced to fourteen (14) days
and seven (7) days, respectively.