Rule 25.
Substitution of parties.
(a) Death.
(1) If a party dies and the claim is not thereby extinguished, the court may
order substitution of the proper parties. The motion for substitution may be made
by any party or by the successors or representatives of the deceased party and,
together with the notice of hearing, shall be served on the parties as provided in
Rule 5 and upon persons not parties in the manner provided in Rule 4 for the
service of a summons, and may be served in any county. Unless the motion for
substitution is made not later than six months after the death is suggested upon
the record by service of a statement of the fact of the death as provided herein
for the service of the motion, the action shall in the absence of a showing of
excusable neglect be dismissed as to the deceased party.
(2) In the event of the death of one or more of the plaintiffs or of one or
more of the defendants in an action in which the right sought to be enforced
survives only to the surviving plaintiffs or only against the surviving defendants,
the action does not abate. The death shall be suggested upon the record and the
action shall proceed in favor of or against the surviving parties.
(3) In any such pending action the failure of any party to comply with § 43-
2-350, Code of Alabama 1975 (statute of nonclaims), shall not be a bar to a claim
against the estate to the extent that the estate is entitled to assert any right under
any contract providing for the payment of the judgment in said action.
(b) Incompetency. If a party becomes incompetent, the court upon motion
served as provided in subdivision (a) of this rule may allow the action to be
continued by or against the party’s representative.
(c) Transfer of interest. In case of any transfer of interest, the action may
be continued by or against the original party, unless the court upon motion
directs the person to whom the interest is transferred to be substituted in the
action or joined with the original party. Service of the motion shall be made as
provided in subdivision (a) of this rule.
(d) Public officers; death or separation from office.
(1) When a public officer is a party to an action in an official capacity and
during its pendency dies, resigns, or otherwise ceases to hold office, the action
does not abate and the officer’s successor is automatically substituted as a party.
Proceedings following the substitution shall be in the name of the substituted
party, but any misnomer not affecting the substantial rights of the parties shall be
disregarded. An order of substitution may be entered at any time, but the
omission to enter such an order shall not affect the substitution.
(2) A public officer who sues or is sued in an official capacity may be
described as a party by the officer’s official title rather than by name; but the
court may require the officer’s name to be added.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 25 applies in the district courts.