Rule 45.
Subpoena.
(a) Form; issuance.
(1) Every subpoena shall
(A) state the name of the court from which it is issued; and
(B) state the title of the action, the name of the court in which it is
pending, and its civil action number; and
(C) command each person to whom it is directed to attend and give
testimony or to produce and permit inspection, copying, testing, or
sampling of designated books, documents, electronically stored
information, or tangible things in the possession, custody or control of that
person, or to permit inspection of premises, at a time and place therein
specified; and
(D) set forth the text of subdivisions (c) and (d) of this rule.
A command to produce evidence or to permit inspection, copying, testing,
or sampling may be joined with a command to appear at trial or hearing or at
deposition, or may be issued separately. A subpoena may specify the form or
forms in which electronically stored information is to be produced.
(2) A subpoena commanding attendance at a trial or hearing and a
subpoena commanding attendance at a deposition shall issue from the court in
which the action is pending.
(3) The clerk shall issue a subpoena to a party requesting it, except that a
subpoena for production, inspection, copying, testing, or sampling separate from
a subpoena commanding the attendance of a person shall issue from the court in
which the action is pending pursuant to the additional requirements set forth
below:
(A) Notice of Intent to Serve Subpoena for Production or Inspection.
The party seeking issuance of a subpoena for production, inspection,
copying, testing, or sampling shall serve a notice to every other party of
the intent to serve such subpoena upon the expiration of fifteen (15) days
from the service of the notice, and the proposed subpoena shall be
attached to the notice. The court may allow a shorter or longer time. Such
notice may be served without leave of court upon the expiration of forty-
five (45) days after service of the summons and complaint or other mode
of service under Rule 4–Rule 4.4 upon any defendant, except that leave is
not required within the forty-five- (45-) day period if a defendant has
previously sought discovery.
(B) Objection to Issuance of Subpoena for Production or Inspection.
Any person or party may serve an objection to the issuance of a subpoena
for production, inspection, copying, testing, or sampling within ten (10)
days of the service of said notice and in such event the subpoena shall not
issue. The party serving the notice may move for an order under Rule
37(a) with respect to such objection. If no objection is timely served, the
clerk shall cause the subpoena to be issued upon the expiration of fifteen
(15) days from the service of the notice or upon the expiration of such
other time as may have been allowed by the court.
(C) Content of Subpoena for Production or Inspection. The
subpoena shall be directed to a person at a stated address, and, if the
name of the person is not known, the subpoena shall give a general
description sufficient to identify the person or the particular class or group
to which the person belongs. The subpoena shall set forth the items to be
produced, inspected, copied, tested, or sampled, either by individual item
or by category, and describe each item and category with reasonable
particularity. The subpoena shall specify a reasonable time to comply of
no less than fifteen (15) days after service unless the court orders
otherwise and the manner of making the inspection, production, copying,
testing, sampling, and performing the related acts. Such activities with
reference to documents, including electronically stored information, or
tangible things shall take place where the documents or tangible things
are regularly kept or at some other reasonable place designated by the
recipient. The subpoena may give the recipient an option to deliver or mail
legible copies of documents or things to the party serving the subpoena,
but the recipient may condition the preparation of copies on the payment
in advance of the reasonable cost of making such copies. Any other party
shall have the right to be present at the time of compliance with the
subpoena. The subpoena shall advise the recipient of the right to object at
any time prior to the date set forth in the subpoena for compliance
therewith.
(D) Availability of Copies of Documents. If the party serving the
subpoena obtains copies of documents, including electronically stored
information, or things, that party shall make available a duplicate of such
copies at the request of any other party upon the payment of the
reasonable cost of making such copies.
(b) Service.
(1) A subpoena issued on behalf of any party may be served by the
sheriff, a deputy sheriff, or any other person who is not a party, who is not
related within the third degree by blood or marriage to the party seeking service
of process, and who is not less than 19 years of age or by certified mail or
commercial carrier pursuant to the provisions of Rule 4. Service of a subpoena
upon a person named therein shall be made by delivering a copy thereof to such
person or by leaving a copy at the person's dwelling house or usual place of
abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein
and, if the person's attendance at a place more than 100 miles from the person's
residence is commanded, by tendering to that person the fees for one day's
attendance and an amount to reimburse the mileage allowed by law. Prior notice
of intent to secure the issuance of a subpoena to command production of
documents and things or inspection of premises before trial under the procedure
set forth in subparagraph (a)(3) of this rule shall be served on each party in the
manner prescribed by Rule 5(b).
(2) Subject to the provisions of clause (ii) of subparagraph (c)(3)(A) of this
rule, a subpoena may be served at any place within the state.
(3) Proof of service when necessary shall be made by filing with the clerk
of the court by which the subpoena is issued a statement of the date and manner
of service and of the names of the persons served, certified by the person who
made the service.
(c) Protection of persons subject to subpoenas.
(1) A party or an attorney responsible for the issuance and service of a
subpoena shall take reasonable steps to avoid imposing undue burden or
expense on a person subject to that subpoena. The court from which the
subpoena was issued shall enforce this duty and impose upon the party or
attorney in breach of this duty an appropriate sanction, which may include, but is
not limited to, lost earnings and a reasonable attorney fee.
(2)(A) A person commanded to produce and permit inspection, copying,
testing, or sampling of designated electronically stored information, books,
papers, documents, or tangible things or inspection of premises need not appear
in person at the place of production or inspection unless commanded to appear
for deposition, hearing, or trial.
(B) Subject to subdivision (d)(2) of this rule, a person commanded to
produce and permit inspection, copying, testing, or sampling at any time before
the time specified for compliance may serve upon the party or attorney
designated in the subpoena written objection to producing any of or all the
designated materials or to inspection of the premises or to producing
electronically stored information in the form or forms requested. "Serve" as used
herein means mailing to the party or attorney. If objection is made, the party
serving the subpoena shall not be entitled to inspect, copy, test, or sample the
materials or inspect the premises except pursuant to an order of the court by
which the subpoena was issued. If objection has been made, the party serving
the subpoena may, upon notice to the person commanded to produce, move at
any time for an order to compel the production, inspection, copying, testing, or
sampling. Such an order to compel shall protect any person who is not a party or
an officer of a party from significant expense resulting from the inspection,
copying, testing, or sampling commanded.
(3)(A) On timely motion, the court by which a subpoena was issued shall
quash or modify the subpoena if it
(i) fails to allow reasonable time for compliance;
(ii) requires a resident of this state who is not a party or an officer of
a party to travel to a place more than one hundred (100) miles from the
place where that person resides, is employed, or regularly transacts
business in person, or requires a nonresident of this state who is not a
party or an officer of a party to travel to a place within this state more than
one hundred (100) miles from the place of service or, where separate from
the place of service, more than one hundred (100) miles from the place
where that person is employed or regularly transacts business in person,
except that, subject to the provisions of clause (c)(3)(B)(iii) of this rule,
such a person may in order to attend trial be commanded to travel from
any such place within the state in which the trial is held, or
(iii) requires disclosure of privileged or other protected matter and
no exception or waiver applies, or
(iv) subjects a person to undue burden.
(B) If a subpoena
(i) requires disclosure of a trade secret or other confidential
research, development, or commercial information, or
(ii) requires disclosure of an unretained expert's opinion or
information not describing specific events or occurrences in dispute and
resulting from the expert's study made not at the request of any party, or
(iii) requires a person who is not a party or an officer of a party to
incur substantial expense to travel more than 100 miles to attend trial,
the court may, to protect a person subject to or affected by the subpoena,
quash or modify the subpoena or, if the party in whose behalf the
subpoena is issued shows a substantial need for the testimony or material
that cannot be otherwise met without undue hardship and assures that the
person to whom the subpoena is addressed will be reasonably
compensated, the court may order appearance or production only upon
specified conditions.
(d) Duties in responding to subpoena.
(1) A person responding to a subpoena to produce documents shall
produce them as they are kept in the usual course of business or shall organize
and label them to correspond with the categories in the demand.
(2) When information subject to a subpoena is withheld on a claim that it is
privileged or subject to protection as trial-preparation materials, the claim shall be
made expressly and shall be supported by a description of the nature of the
documents, communications, or things not produced that is sufficient to enable
the demanding party to contest the claim.
(3) If a subpoena does not specify the form or forms for producing
electronically stored information, a person responding to a subpoena must
produce the information in a form or forms in which the person ordinarily
maintains it or in a form or forms that are reasonably usable.
(4) A person responding to a subpoena need not produce the same
electronically stored information in more than one form.
(5) A person responding to a subpoena need not provide discovery of
electronically stored information from sources the person identifies to the
requesting party as not reasonably accessible because of undue burden or cost.
On motion to compel discovery or to quash, the person from whom discovery is
sought must show that the information is not reasonably accessible because of
undue burden or cost. If that showing is made, the court may nonetheless order
discovery from such sources if the requesting party shows good cause,
considering the limitations of Rule 26(b)(2)(B). The court may specify conditions
regarding the production of the discovery.
(6) If information is produced in discovery that is subject to a claim of
privilege or of protection as trial-preparation material, the person or party making
the claim may notify any party that received the information of the claim and the
basis for it. After being notified, a party must promptly return, sequester, or
destroy the specified information and any copies it has and may not use or
disclose the information until the claim is resolved. Any party or the producing
person may promptly present the information to the court under seal for a
determination of the claim. If the receiving party disclosed the information before
being notified, it must take reasonable steps to retrieve it. The person who
produced the information must preserve the information until the claim is
resolved.
(e) Contempt. Failure by any person without adequate excuse to obey a
subpoena served upon that person may be deemed a contempt of the court from
which the subpoena issued. An adequate cause for failure to obey exists when a
subpoena purports to require a nonparty to attend or produce at a place not
within the limits provided by clause (ii) of subparagraph (c)(3)(A).
(dc) District court rule. Rule 45 applies in the district courts.