Rule 6.
Time.
(a) Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by
these rules, by order of court, or by any applicable statute, the day of the act,
event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not
be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is
a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the
end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, or,
when the act to be done is the filing of a paper in court, a day on which weather
or other conditions have made the office of the clerk of the court inaccessible, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day that is not one of the
aforementioned days. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than
eleven (11) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be
excluded in the computation. As used in this rule and in Rule 77(c) “legal holiday”
includes New Year’s Day, Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., Presidents’ Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day appointed as a holiday by
the President or the Congress of the United States, or as prescribed in § 1-3-8,
Code of Alabama 1975.
(b) Enlargement. When by these rules or by a notice given thereunder or
by order of court an act is required or allowed to be done at or within a specified
time, the court for cause shown may at any time in its discretion (1) with or
without motion or notice order the period enlarged if request therefor is made
before the expiration of the period originally prescribed or as extended by a
previous order, or (2) upon motion made after the expiration of the specified
period permit the act to be done where the failure to act was the result of
excusable neglect; but it may not extend the time for taking any action under
Rules 50(b), 52(b), 59(b), (d), and (e), and 60(b), except to the extent and under
the conditions stated in them.
(c) [Omitted].
(d) For motions—affidavits. A written motion, other than one which may be
heard ex parte, and notice of the hearing thereof shall be served not later than
five (5) days before the time specified for the hearing, unless a different period is
fixed by these rules or by order of the court. Such an order may for cause shown
be made on ex parte application. When a motion is supported by affidavit, the
affidavit shall be served with the motion; and, except as otherwise provided in
Rule 59(c), opposing affidavits may be served not later than one (1) day before
the hearing, unless the court permits them to be served at some other time.
(e) Additional time after service by mail or electronic filing. Whenever a
party has the right or is required to do some act or take some proceedings within
a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon the party
and the notice or paper is served upon the party by mail or electronic filing, three
(3) days shall be added to the prescribed period.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 6 applies in the district courts with the
following exception. The portion of Rule 6(a) regarding the computation of time
when the period prescribed or allowed is less than eleven (11) days does not
apply to any time periods prescribed or allowed by statute or these rules in
unlawful-detainer or eviction actions.