Rule 4.
Process: General and miscellaneous provisions.
(a) Summons or other process.
(1) Issuance. Upon the filing of the complaint, or other document required
to be served in the manner of an original complaint, the clerk shall forthwith issue
the required summons or other process for service upon each defendant. Upon
request of the plaintiff separate or additional summons shall issue at any time
against any defendant.
(2) FORM. The summons or other process, or each of them in cases
involving multiple defendants, shall be signed by the clerk, contain the name of
the court and the name of the first party on each side with an appropriate
indication of other parties in cases involving multiple parties, be directed to the
defendant or each defendant in cases involving multiple defendants, state the
name and address of the plaintiff's attorney, if any, otherwise the plaintiff's
address, and the time within which these rules require the defendant to appear
and defend, and shall notify the defendant that, in case of the defendant's failure
to do so, judgment by default may be rendered against the defendant for the
relief demanded in the complaint.
(3) COPY OF COMPLAINT OR OTHER DOCUMENT. A copy of the complaint,
showing the case number assigned to the action, or other document to be
served shall accompany each summons or other process. The plaintiff shall
furnish the clerk with sufficient copies of the complaint or other document to be
served. Copies are not required if the complaint or other document is filed
electronically.
(4) PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT DEFINED. For the purpose of issuance and service of
summons or other process, "plaintiff" shall include any party seeking the
issuance of service of summons, and "defendant" shall include any party
upon whom service of summons or other process is sought.
(5) INSTRUCTIONS AND FORM. The plaintiff shall furnish the clerk with instructions
for service of the complaint or other document and, when requested by the
clerk, the plaintiff shall also furnish sufficient properly completed copies of
the summons or other process. When the plaintiff has requested the clerk
to issue service by certified mail, the plaintiff, at the request of the clerk,
shall also furnish properly completed postal forms necessary for such
service.
(b) Time limit for service. If service of the summons and complaint is not
made upon a defendant within 120 days after the filing of the complaint, the
court, upon motion or on its own initiative, after at least fourteen (14) days' notice
to the plaintiff, may dismiss the action without prejudice as to the defendant upon
whom service was not made or direct that service be effected within a specified
time; provided, however, that if the plaintiff shows good cause for the failure to
serve the defendant, the court shall extend the time for service for an appropriate
period. This subdivision does not apply to fictitious-party practice pursuant to
(c) Upon whom process served. Service of process, except service by
publication as provided in Rule 4.3, shall be made as follows:
(1) INDIVIDUAL. Upon an individual, other than a minor or an incompetent
person, by serving the individual or by leaving a copy of the summons and the
complaint at the individual's dwelling house or usual place of abode with some
person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein or by delivering a copy
of the summons and the complaint to an agent authorized by appointment or by
law to receive service of process;
(2) MINOR. Upon a minor by serving any one of the following: the father,
the mother, the guardian, the individual having care of the minor or with whom
the minor lives, or the spouse, if the minor is married, and, if the minor is over the
age of sixteen (16) years, by also serving the minor personally;
(3) INCOMPETENT NOT CONFINED. Upon an incompetent person not confined
by serving the incompetent and that person's guardian but, if no guardian has
been appointed, by serving the incompetent and a person with whom the
incompetent lives or a person who cares for the incompetent;
(4) INCOMPETENT CONFINED. Upon an incompetent person not having a
guardian and confined in any institution for the mentally ill or mentally deficient,
by serving the superintendent of the institution or similar official or person having
the responsibility for custody of the incompetent person;
(5) INCARCERATED PERSON. Upon an individual incarcerated in any penal
institution or detention facility within this state, by serving the individual, except
that when the individual to be served is a minor, by serving any one of the
following: the father, the mother, the guardian, the individual having care of the
minor, or the spouse, if the minor is married, and, if the minor is over the age of
sixteen (16) years, by also serving the minor
(6) CORPORATIONS AND OTHER ENTITIES. Upon a domestic or foreign
corporation or upon a partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability company, or unincorporated organization or association, by
serving an officer, a partner (other than a limited partner), a managing or general
agent, or any agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of
process.
(7) STATE. Upon this state or any one of its departments, agencies, offices,
or institutions, by serving the officer responsible for the administration of the
department, agency, office, or institution, and by serving the attorney general of
this state;
(8) LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES. Upon a
county, municipal corporation, or any other governmental entity not previously
mentioned, or an agency thereof, by serving the chief executive officer or the
clerk, or other person designated by appointment or by statute to receive service
of process, or upon the attorney general of the state if such service is
accompanied by an affidavit of a party or the party's attorney that all such
persons described herein are unknown or cannot be located.
(d) Amendment. The court, within its discretion and upon such terms as
are just, may at any time allow or approve the amendment of any process or
proof of service thereof, unless the amendment would cause material prejudice
to the substantial rights of the party against whom the process was issued.
(e) Service refused. If service of process is refused, and the certified mail
receipt or the return of the person serving process states that service of process
has been refused, the clerk shall send by ordinary mail a copy of the summons or
other process and complaint or other document to be served to the defendant at
the address set forth in the complaint or other document to be served. Service
shall be deemed complete when the fact of mailing is entered of record.
(f) Multiple defendants; incomplete service; dismissal of fictitiously named
defendants. When there are multiple defendants and the summons (or other
document to be served) and the complaint have been served on one or more, but
not all, of the defendants, the plaintiff may proceed to judgment as to the
defendant or defendants on whom process has been served and, if the judgment
as to the defendant or defendants who have been served is final in all other
respects, it shall be a final judgment. After the entry of judgment, if the plaintiff is
able to obtain service on a defendant or defendants not previously served
(except, however, defendants designated as fictitious parties as allowed by Rule
9(h), who shall be deemed to have been dismissed voluntarily when the case
was announced ready for trial against other defendants sued by their true
names), the court shall hear and determine the matter as to such defendant or
defendants in the same manner as if such defendant or defendants had originally
been brought into court, but such defendant or defendants shall be allowed the
benefit of any payment or satisfaction that may have been made on the judgment
previously entered in the action.
(g) Effect of availability of alternative or dual modes of service of process.
There shall be no objection to the service of process or notice to litigants, that
two or more modes of service of notice are provided by law or under these rules,
but service of notice perfected in any one manner or mode that is provided for by
law or under these rules shall be deemed sufficient, notwithstanding that other
modes or manner of service and notice are provided by law or under these rules.
(h) Acceptance or waiver of service. A defendant may accept or waive
service of process by a document signed by the defendant and filed with the
clerk of court from which the process issued.
(i) Methods of service. Service under this rule shall include the following:
(1) DELIVERY BY A PROCESS SERVER.
(A) By Sheriff or Constable. When process issued from any court
subject to the provisions of these rules is to be delivered personally within
this state, the clerk of the court shall deliver or mail the process and
sufficient copies of the process and complaint, or other documents to be
served, to the sheriff or constable of the county in which the party to be
served resides or may be found.
(B) By Designated Person. As an alternative to delivery by the
sheriff, or when process is to be delivered personally outside this state,
process issuing from any court governed by these rules may be served by
any person not less than nineteen (19) years of age, who is not a party
and is not related within the third degree by blood or marriage to the party
seeking service of process.
(C) How Served and Returned. The person serving process shall
deliver a copy of the process and accompanying documents to the
defendant or other person who may be served under the provisions of
Rule 4(c). When the copy of the process has been delivered, the person
serving process shall endorse that fact on the return copy of the process,
stating the date of service and the first and last name of the person
served. If the service is substituted service on a person other than the
defendant, the return shall also include sufficient information to show the
person served qualifies as a person to be served for the defendant under
Rule 4(c). The return shall be signed by the server and filed with the clerk
of the issuing court, who shall make the appropriate entry on the docket
sheet and electronic record relating to the action.
If the service is made by a sheriff, deputy sheriff, or elected
constable, the return shall clearly indicate the name, official title, and
badge number or precinct number of the serving officer or constable. If the
service is made by a Designated Person under Rule 4(i)(1)(B), the return
shall clearly indicate the name, the physical address of the home or
business, and the telephone number of the person serving process and
must include a statement that the server meets the requirements of Rule
4(i)(1)(B). The return of the person serving process in the manner
described herein shall be prima facie evidence that process has been
served.
(D) Failure of Service. When the person serving process is unable
to serve a copy of the process within sixty (60) days from issuance of the
process by the clerk of court, the person serving process shall endorse
that fact and the reason therefor on the process and return the process
and copies to the clerk, who shall make the appropriate entry on the
docket sheet and the electronic record relating to the action. Failure to
make service within the sixty- (60-) day period and failure to make proof of
service do not affect the validity of service perfected beyond that period.
(2) SERVICE BY CERTIFIED MAIL.
(A) When Proper. When the plaintiff files a written request with the
clerk for service by certified mail, service of process shall be made by that
method. Alternatively, the attorney or party filing the process and
complaint may initiate service by certified mail as provided in this rule.
(B) How Served. (i) In the event of service by certified mail by the
clerk, the clerk shall place a copy of the process and complaint or other
document to be served in an envelope and shall address the envelope to
the person to be served with instructions to forward. In the case of an
entity within the scope of one of the subdivisions of Rule 4(c), the
addressee shall be a person described in the appropriate subdivision. The
clerk shall affix adequate postage and place the sealed envelope in the
United States mail as certified mail with instructions to forward, return
receipt requested, with instructions to the delivering postal employee to
show to whom delivered, date of delivery, and address where delivered.
The case number of the case in which the pleading has been filed shall be
included on the return receipt. The clerk shall forthwith enter the fact of
mailing on the docket sheet of the action and make a similar entry when
the return receipt is received.
(ii) Alternatively, the attorney or party filing the process
and complaint or other document to be served may obtain a
copy of the filed pleading from the clerk or, if the pleading was
filed electronically, use the copy returned electronically by the
clerk. The attorney or party shall then place that copy of the
process and complaint or other document to be served in an
envelope and address the envelope to the person to be served
with instructions to forward. In the case of an entity within the
scope of one of the subdivisions of Rule 4(c), the addressee
shall be a person described in the appropriate subdivision. The
attorney or party shall affix adequate postage and place the
sealed envelope in the United States mail as certified mail with
instructions to forward, return receipt requested, with
instructions to the delivering postal employee to show to whom
delivered, date of delivery, and address where delivered. The
return receipt shall be addressed to the clerk of the court issuing
the process and shall identify the case number of the case in
which the pleading has been filed. Upon mailing, the attorney or
party shall immediately file with the court an "Affidavit of
Certified Mailing of Process and Complaint." That affidavit shall
verify that a filed copy of the process and complaint or other
document to be served has been mailed by certified mail in
accordance with this rule.
(C) When Effective. Service by certified mail shall be deemed
complete and the time for answering shall run from the date of delivery to
the named addressee or the addressee's agent as evidenced by signature
on the return receipt. Within the meaning of this subdivision, "agent"
means a person or entity specifically authorized by the addressee to
receive the addressee's mail and to deliver that mail to the addressee.
Such agent's authority shall be conclusively established when the
addressee acknowledges actual receipt of the summons and complaint or
the court determines that the evidence proves the addressee did actually
receive the summons and complaint in time to avoid a default. An action
shall not be dismissed for improper service of process unless the service
failed to inform the defendant of the action within time to avoid a default. In
the case of an entity included in one of the provisions of Rule 4(c),
"defendant," within the meaning of this subdivision, shall be such a person
described in the applicable subdivision of 4(c).
(D) Failure of Delivery. Failure to make service within sixty (60)
days from issuance of the process by the clerk of the court and failure to
make proof of service do not affect the validity of service perfected beyond
that period.
Rule 4(i)(3), Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure
(3) Service by Commercial Carrier.
(A) When Proper.
(i) When the plaintiff files a written request
with the clerk for service by commercial carrier,
service of process shall be made by that method. For
purposes of this subdivision, "commercial carrier"
means only those commercial carriers approved by
the Administrative Director of Courts, pursuant to Rule
45 of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration.
When service by commercial carrier is initiated by the
clerk, the clerk's choice of commercial carrier is
limited to those approved by the Administrative
Director of Courts.
(ii) Alternatively, the attorney or party filing
the process and complaint may initiate service by
commercial carrier as provided in this rule. For
purposes of this subdivision, "commercial carrier"
means any foreign or domestic business entity that is
not a party to the civil action; that has as its primary
purpose the delivery of letters and parcels of any
type; and that will deliver to the sender a written or
electronic receipt showing to whom the process and
complaint were delivered, the written or electronic
signature of the recipient, the date of delivery, the
address where delivered, and the person or entity
effecting delivery.
(B) How Served.
(i) In the event of service by commercial carrier
initiated by the clerk, the clerk shall deliver to the
commercial carrier a copy of the process and
complaint or other document to be served in an
envelope and shall address the envelope to the
person to be served. In the case of an entity within the
scope of one of the subdivisions of Rule 4(c), the
addressee shall be a person described in the
appropriate subdivision. The clerk shall provide to the
commercial carrier payment of the required shipping
costs, with instructions to the commercial carrier to
provide to the clerk a written or electronic receipt
showing to whom the process and complaint or other
document to be served was delivered, the written or
electronic signature of the recipient, the date of
delivery, the address where delivered, and the person
or entity effecting delivery. The clerk shall forthwith
enter the fact of delivery to the commercial carrier on
the docket sheet of the action and make a similar
entry when a delivery receipt is received.
(ii) Alternatively, the attorney or party filing
the process and complaint or other document to be
served may obtain a copy of the filed pleading from
the clerk or, if the pleading was filed electronically,
use the copy returned electronically by the clerk. The
attorney or party shall then deliver to the commercial
carrier that copy of the process and complaint or other
document to be served in an envelope and shall
address the envelope to the person to be served. In
the case of an entity within the scope of one of the
subdivisions of Rule 4(c), the addressee shall be a
person described in the appropriate subdivision. The
attorney or party shall provide to the commercial
carrier payment of the required shipping costs, with
instructions to the commercial carrier to provide to the
attorney or party a written or electronic receipt
showing to whom the process and complaint or other
document to be served was delivered, the written or
electronic signature of the recipient, the date of
delivery, the address where delivered, and the person
or entity effecting delivery. Upon delivery to the
commercial carrier, the attorney or party shall
immediately file with the court an "Affidavit of Delivery
to a Commercial Carrier of Process and Complaint."
That affidavit shall verify that a filed copy of the
process and complaint or other document to be
served has been delivered to a commercial carrier in
accordance with this rule.
(C) When Effective. Service by commercial carrier shall
be deemed complete and the time for answering shall run from the
date of delivery as evidenced by the commercial carrier's written or
electronic receipt showing to whom the process and complaint or
other document to be served was delivered, the written or
electronic signature of the recipient, the date of delivery, the
address where delivered, and the person or entity effecting
delivery. When service is initiated under Rule 4(i)(3)(B)(ii), the
attorney or party shall, within ten (10) days after receiving the
commercial carrier's written or electronic delivery receipt, file with
the court a "Proof of Service by Commercial Carrier" that identifies
the commercial carrier and explains the method of service, states
the name of the person served, notes the date of delivery, and has
attached a printed copy of the commercial carrier's written or
electronic delivery receipt or other evidence of delivery. Within the
meaning of this subdivision, "agent" means a person or entity
specifically authorized by the addressee to receive the addressee's
commercial-carrier deliveries and to deliver them to the addressee.
Such agent's authority shall be conclusively established when the
addressee acknowledges actual receipt of the summons and
complaint or the court determines that the evidence proves the
addressee did actually receive the summons and complaint in time
to avoid a default. An action shall not be dismissed for improper
service of process unless the service failed to inform the defendant
of the action within time to avoid a default. In the case of an entity
included in one of the provisions of Rule 4(c), "defendant," within
the meaning of this subdivision, shall be such a person described in
the applicable subdivision of 4(c).
(D) Failure of Delivery. Failure to make service within
sixty (60) days from issuance of the process by the clerk of the
court and failure to make proof of service do not affect the validity
of service perfected beyond that period.
(dc) District Court Rule. Rule 4 applies in the district courts.