Rule 16.
Pre-trial conferences; scheduling; management.
(a) Pretrial conferences; objectives. In any action, the court may in its
discretion at any time direct the attorneys for the parties and any unrepresented
parties to appear before it for a conference or conferences before trial for such
purposes as
(1) expediting the disposition of the action;
(2) establishing early and continuing control so that the case will not be
protracted because of lack of management;
(3) discouraging wasteful pretrial activities;
(4) improving the quality of the trial through more thorough preparation;
and
(5) facilitating the settlement of the case.
When the court has not ordered a conference, any party may require the
scheduling of such conference on written notice served at such time in advance
of trial so as to permit the conference to take place at least twenty-one (21) days
before the case is set for trial.
(b) Scheduling and planning. The court may enter a scheduling order that
limits the time
(1) to join other parties and to amend the pleadings;
(2) to file and hear motions; and
(3) to complete discovery.
The scheduling order also may include
(4) the date or dates for conferences before trial, a final pretrial
conference, and trial;
(5) provisions for discovery of electronically stored information;
(6) any agreements the parties reach for asserting claims of privilege or
asserting that certain material is protected as trial-preparation material after the
material has been produced; and
(7) any other matters appropriate in the circumstances of the case.
Any scheduling order shall be issued as soon as practicable. Once a
scheduling order is issued, the schedule set thereby shall not be modified except
by leave of court upon a showing of good cause.
(c) Subjects to be discussed at pretrial conferences. The participants at
any conference under this rule may consider and take action with respect to
(1) the formulation and simplification of the issues, including the
elimination of frivolous claims or defenses;
(2) the necessity or desirability of amendments to the pleadings;
(3) the possibility of obtaining admissions of fact and of documents which
will avoid unnecessary proof, stipulations regarding the authenticity of
documents, and advance rulings from the court on the admissibility of evidence;
(4) the avoidance of unnecessary proof and of cumulative evidence;
(5) the identification of witnesses and documents, the need and schedule
for filing and exchanging pretrial briefs, and the date or dates for further
conferences and for trial;
(6) the advisability of referring matters to a magistrate or master;
(7) the possibility of settlement or the voluntary use by all parties of
extrajudicial procedures to resolve the dispute, including mediation conducted
pursuant to the Alabama Civil Court Mediation Rules;
(8) the form and substance of the pretrial order;
(9) the disposition of pending motions;
(10) the need for adopting special procedures for managing potentially
difficult or protracted actions that may involve complex issues, multiple parties,
difficult legal questions, or unusual proof problems; and
(11) such other matters as may aid in the disposition of the action.
At least one of the attorneys for each party participating in any conference
before trial shall have authority to enter into stipulations and to make admissions
regarding all matters that the participants may reasonably anticipate may be
discussed.
(d) Final pretrial conference. Any final pretrial conference shall be held as
close to the time of trial as reasonable under the circumstances. The participants
at any such conference shall formulate a plan for trial, including a program for
facilitating the admission of evidence. The conference shall be attended by at
least one of the attorneys who will conduct the trial for each of the parties and by
any unrepresented parties.
(e) Pretrial orders. After any conference held pursuant to this rule, an
order shall be entered reciting the action taken. This order shall control the
subsequent course of the action unless modified by a subsequent order. The
order following a final pretrial conference shall be modified only to prevent
manifest injustice.
(f) Sanctions. If a party or party’s attorney fails to obey a scheduling or
pretrial order, or if no appearance is made on behalf of a party at a scheduling or
pretrial conference, or if a party or party’s attorney is substantially unprepared to
participate in the conference, or if a party or party’s attorney fails to participate in
good faith, the judge, upon motion or the judge’s own initiative, may make such
orders with regard thereto as are just, and among others any of the orders
provided in Rule 37(b)(2)(B), (C), (D). In lieu of or in addition to any other
sanction, the judge shall require the party or the attorney representing the party
or both to pay the reasonable expenses incurred because of any noncompliance
with this rule, including attorney fees, unless the judge finds that the
noncompliance was substantially justified or that other circumstances make an
award of expenses unjust.
(dc) District court rules. Pretrial procedure in the district court shall be as
follows:
Immediately preceding the trial on the merits, or prior thereto, if justice
requires, the court may direct and require the attorneys for the parties to appear
before it for a conference to consider and determine:
(1) the simplification of the issues;
(2) the possibility of obtaining admissions of fact and of documents which
will avoid unnecessary proof;
(3) such other matters as may aid in the disposition of the action.