Rule 30.
Depositions upon oral examination.
(a) When depositions may be taken. After commencement of the action,
any party may take the testimony of any person, including a party, by deposition
upon oral examination. Leave of court, granted with or without notice, must be
obtained only if the plaintiff seeks to take a deposition prior to the expiration of
thirty (30) days after service of the summons and complaint upon any defendant
or other mode of service under Rule 4, except that leave is not required (1) if a
defendant has served a notice of taking deposition or otherwise sought
discovery, or (2) if special notice is given as provided in subdivision (b)(2) of this
rule. The attendance of witnesses may be compelled by subpoena as provided in
Rule 45. The deposition of a person confined in prison may be taken only by
leave of court on such terms as the court prescribes.
(b) Notice of examination; general requirements; special notice;
videotaping or other equivalent technology; procurement of documents and
things; deposition of organization.
(1) A party desiring to take the deposition of any person upon oral
examination shall give reasonable notice in writing to every other party
to the action. The notice shall state the time and place for taking the
deposition and the name and address of each person to be examined,
if known, and, if the name is not known, a general description sufficient
to identify the person or the particular class or group to which the
person belongs. If a subpoena duces tecum is to be served on the
person to be examined, the designation of the materials to be
produced as set forth in the subpoena shall be attached to or included
in the notice.
(2) Leave of court is not required for the taking of a deposition by
plaintiff if the notice (A) states that the person to be examined is about
to go out of the circuit where the action is pending and more than one
hundred (100) miles from the place of trial, or is about to go out of the
United States, or is bound on a voyage to sea, and will be unavailable
for examination unless the person's deposition is taken before
expiration of the (thirty-) 30-day period, and (B) sets forth facts to
support the statement. The plaintiff's attorney shall sign the notice, and
the attorney's signature constitutes a certification by the attorney that
to the best of the attorney's knowledge, information, and belief the
statement and supporting facts are true. The sanctions provided by
Rule 11 are applicable to the certification.
If a party shows that when the party was served with notice under this
subdivision (b)(2) the party was unable through the exercise of
diligence to obtain counsel to represent the party at the taking of the
deposition, the deposition may not be used against the party.
(3) The court may for cause shown enlarge or shorten the time for
taking the deposition.
(4) The testimony at a deposition may be recorded on videotape, or by
other equivalent technology, in addition to the stenographic record.
Any such deposition will be conducted in a manner to replicate, to the
extent feasible, the presentation of evidence at a trial. If the deposition
is to be so recorded, the notice given pursuant to subdivision (b)(1) of
this rule shall designate the person before whom the deposition shall
be taken, the manner of recording, and the reason why such recording
is necessary or desirable, and include other provisions to assure that
the recorded testimony will be accurate and trustworthy and that the
witness will be treated fairly. The party requesting videotaping or
recording by other equivalent technology will bear the expense
associated with such videotaping or recording. Any party may, at its
own expense, obtain a copy of the recording. These expenses may be
taxed as costs at the conclusion of the action, if appropriate. The
written transcript by the court reporter shall constitute the official record
of the deposition for purposes of subdivisions (e) and (f) of this rule.
(5) The notice to a party deponent may be accompanied by a request
that the party, at the taking of a deposition, produce and permit
inspection and copying of designated books, papers, documents, or
tangible things which constitute or contain matters within the scope of
Rule 26(b). If the request accompanies the summons and complaint or
is new, the party deponent may, within 45 days, serve upon the party
taking the deposition, written objection to inspection or copying of any
or all of the designated materials; otherwise, the deponent must serve
any such objection within 14 days. If objection is made, the party taking
the deposition shall not be entitled to inspect the materials except
pursuant to an order of the court. The party taking the deposition may
move at any time for an order under Rule 37(a) with respect to any
objection to the request or any part thereof, or any failure to produce or
permit inspection as requested.
(6) A party may in the party's notice and in a subpoena name as the
deponent a public or private corporation or a partnership or association
or governmental agency and describe with reasonable particularity the
matters on which examination is requested. In that event, the
organization so named shall designate one or more officers, directors
or managing agents, or other persons who consent to testify on its
behalf, and may set forth, for each person designated, the matters on
which the person will testify. A subpoena shall advise a nonparty
organization of its duty to make such a designation. The persons so
designated shall testify as to matters known or reasonably available to
the organization. This subdivision (b)(6) does not preclude taking a
deposition by any other procedure authorized in these rules.
(7) The parties may stipulate in writing, or the court may upon motion
order, that a deposition be taken by telephone or other remote means
using audio-video communication technology. For the purposes of this
rule and Rules 28(a), 37(a)(1), 37(b)(1), and 45(a), a deposition taken
by telephone or by other remote means is taken in the circuit and at
the place where the deponent is to answer questions propounded to
the deponent.
(8) In every deposition that proceeds by videoconferencing in
accordance with Rule 30(b)(7) above, the witness may be sworn in
remotely by audio-video communication technology if the deposition is
conducted by audio-video communication equipment that allows the
court reporter and the witness simultaneously to view and
communicate with each other. If not located within the State of
Alabama, a witness may consent to being placed under oath remotely
as described in this subdivision.
(c) Examination and cross-examination; record of examination; oath;
objections. Examination and cross-examination of witnesses may proceed as
permitted at the trial under the Alabama Rules of Evidence, except that Rule 103
and Rule 615, Ala. R. Evid., which deal with trial procedure, are not applicable to
pretrial discovery. The officer before whom the deposition is to be taken shall put
the witness on oath and shall personally, or by someone acting under the
officer's direction and in the officer's presence, record the testimony of the
witness. The testimony shall be taken stenographically and may be videotaped or
recorded by other equivalent technology in accordance with subdivision (b)(4) of
this rule.
All objections made at the time of the examination to the qualifications of
the officer taking the deposition, or to the manner of taking it, or to the evidence
presented, or to the conduct of any party, and any other objection to the
proceedings, shall be noted by the officer upon the deposition. Evidence objected
to shall be taken subject to any objection, but the examination shall still proceed,
subject to any such objection. Any objection must be stated concisely in a
nonargumentative and nonsuggestive manner. A person may instruct a deponent
not to answer only when necessary to preserve a privilege, to enforce a limitation
ordered by the court, or to present a motion under Rule 30(d)(2). In lieu of
participating in the oral examination, parties may serve written questions in a
sealed envelope on the party taking the deposition and that party shall transmit
them to the officer, who shall propound them to the witness and record the
answers verbatim.
(d) Sanction; Motion to Terminate or Limit Examination.
(1) Sanction. The court may impose an appropriate sanction --
including awarding the reasonable expenses and attorney's fees
incurred by any party -- on any person who impedes, delays, or
frustrates the fair examination of the deponent.
(2) Motion to Terminate or Limit Examination. At any time during
the taking of the deposition, on motion of a party or of the deponent
and upon a showing that the examination is being conducted in bad
faith or in such manner as unreasonably to annoy, embarrass, or
oppress the deponent or party, the court in which the action is
pending or the court in the circuit where the deposition is being
taken may order the officer conducting the examination to cease
forthwith from taking the deposition, or may limit the scope and
manner of the taking of the deposition as provided in Rule 26(c). If
the order made terminates the examination, it shall be resumed
thereafter only upon the order of the court in which the action is
pending. Upon demand of the objecting party or deponent, the
taking of the deposition shall be suspended for the time necessary
to make a motion for an order. The provisions of Rule 37(a)(4)
apply to the award of expenses incurred in relation to the motion.
(e) Submission to witness; changes; signing. When the testimony is fully
transcribed the deposition shall be submitted to the witness for examination and
shall be read to or by the witness, unless such examination and reading are
waived by the witness and by the parties. Any changes in form or substance
which the witness desires to make shall be entered upon the deposition by the
officer with a statement of the reasons given by the witness for making them. The
deposition shall then be signed by the witness, unless the parties by stipulation
waive the signing or the witness is ill or cannot be found or refuses to sign. If the
deposition is not signed by the witness within thirty (30) days of its submission to
the witness, the officer shall sign it and state on the record the fact of the waiver
or of the illness or absence of the witness or the fact of the refusal to sign
together with the reason, if any, given therefor; the deposition may then be used
as fully as though signed unless on a motion to suppress under Rule 32(d)(4) the
court holds that the reasons given for the refusal to sign require rejection of the
deposition in whole or in part.
(f) Certification and filing by officer; exhibits; copies; notice of filing.
(1) The officer shall certify on the deposition that the witness was duly
sworn by the officer and that the deposition is a true record of the
testimony given by the witness. Unless otherwise ordered by the court,
the officer shall then securely seal the deposition in an envelope
indorsed with the title of the action and marked “Deposition of [here
insert name of witness]” and shall promptly file it with the court in which
the action is pending or send it by registered or certified mail to the
clerk thereof for filing.
Documents and things produced for inspection during the examination
of the witness shall, upon the request of a party, be marked for
identification and annexed to the deposition and may be inspected and
copied by any party, except that if the person producing the materials
desires to retain them the person may (A) offer copies to be marked for
identification and annexed to the deposition and to serve thereafter as
originals if the person affords to all parties fair opportunity to verify the
copies by comparison with the originals, or (B) offer the originals to be
marked for identification, after giving to each party an opportunity to
inspect and copy them, in which event the materials may then be used
in the same manner as if annexed to the deposition. Any party may
move for an order that the original be annexed to and returned with the
deposition to the court, pending final disposition of the case.
(2) Upon payment of reasonable charges therefor, the officer shall
furnish a copy of the deposition to any party or to the deponent.
(3) The party taking the deposition shall give prompt notice of its filing
to all other parties.
(g) Failure to attend or to serve subpoena; expenses.
(1) If the party giving the notice of the taking of a deposition fails to
attend and proceed therewith and another party attends in person or
by attorney pursuant to the notice, the court may order the party giving
the notice to pay to such other party the reasonable expenses incurred
by that party and that party’s attorney in attending, including
reasonable attorney fees.
(2) If the party giving the notice of the taking of a deposition of a
witness fails to serve a subpoena upon the witness and the witness
because of such failure does not attend, and if another party attends in
person or by attorney because that party expects the deposition of that
witness to be taken, the court may order the party giving the notice to
pay to such other party the reasonable expenses incurred by that party
and that party’s attorney in attending, including reasonable attorney
fees.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 30 applies in the district courts in those
instances when a deposition on oral examination is permitted by Rule 26(dc).
The reference to “circuit” in Rule 30(b)(7) is changed to “district.” The provisions
of Rule 30(b)(4) do not apply in the district courts absent a stipulation in writing
by the parties or court order.