Rule 12.
Defenses and objections—When and how presented—By pleading or
motion—Motion for judgment on the pleadings.
(a) When presented. A defendant shall serve an answer within thirty (30)
days after the service of the summons and complaint upon that defendant except
when service is made by publication and a different time is prescribed under the
applicable procedure. A party served with a pleading stating a cross-claim
against that party shall serve an answer thereto within thirty (30) days after the
service upon that party. The plaintiff shall serve a reply to a counterclaim in the
answer within thirty (30) days after service of the answer or, if a reply is ordered
by the court, within thirty (30) days after service of the order, unless the order
otherwise directs. The service of a motion permitted under this rule alters these
periods to time as follows, unless a different time is fixed by order of the court: (1)
if the court denies the motion or postpones its disposition until the trial on the
merits, the responsive pleading shall be served within ten (10) days after notice
of the court’s action; (2) if the court grants a motion for a more definite statement
the responsive pleading shall be served within ten (10) days after the service of
the more definite statement. Proceedings to modify, cite for contempt, or similar
motions in divorce proceedings shall not be considered as original pleadings
within the meaning of this rule.
(b) How presented. Every defense, in law or fact, to a claim for relief in
any pleading, whether a claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party claim,
shall be asserted in the responsive pleading thereto if one is required, except that
the following defenses may at the option of the pleader be made by motion: (1)
lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter, (2) lack of jurisdiction over the person,
(3) improper venue, (4) insufficiency of process, (5) insufficiency of service of
process, (6) failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, (7) failure to
join a party under Rule 19. A motion making any of these defenses shall be
made before pleading if a further pleading is permitted. No defense or objection
is waived by being joined with one or more other defenses or objections in a
responsive pleading or motion. If a pleading sets forth a claim for relief to which
the adverse party is not required to serve a responsive pleading, the adverse
party may assert at the trial any defense in law or fact to that claim for relief. If,
on a motion asserting the defense numbered (6) to dismiss for failure of the
pleading to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, matters outside the
pleading are presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be
treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in Rule 56,
and all parties shall be given reasonable opportunity to present all material made
pertinent to such a motion by Rule 56.
(c) Motion for judgment on the pleadings. After the pleadings are closed
but within such time as not to delay the trial, any party may move for judgment on
the pleadings. If, on a motion for judgment on the pleadings, matters outside the
pleadings are presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be
treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in Rule 56,
and all parties shall be given reasonable opportunity to present all material made
pertinent to such a motion by Rule 56.
(d) Preliminary hearings. The defenses specifically enumerated (1)-(7) in
subdivision (b) of this rule, whether made in a pleading or by motion, and the
motion for judgment mentioned in subdivision (c) of this rule shall be heard and
determined before trial on application of any party, unless the court orders that
the hearing and determination thereof be deferred until the trial.
(e) Motion for more definite statement. If a pleading to which a responsive
pleading is permitted is so vague or ambiguous that a party cannot reasonably
be required to frame a responsive pleading, the party may move for a more
definite statement before interposing a responsive pleading. The motion shall
point out the defects complained of and the details desired. If the motion is
granted and the order of the court is not obeyed within ten (10) days after notice
of the order or within such other time as the court may fix, the court may strike
the pleading to which the motion was directed or make such order as it deems
just.
(f) Motion to strike. Upon motion made by a party before responding to a
pleading or, if no responsive pleading is permitted by these rules, upon motion
made by a party within thirty (30) days after the service of the pleading upon the
party or upon the court’s own initiative at any time, the court may order stricken
from any pleading any insufficient defense or any redundant, immaterial,
impertinent, or scandalous matter.
(g) Consolidation of defenses in motion. A party who makes a motion
under this rule may join with it any other motions herein provided for and then
available to the party. If a party makes a motion under this rule but omits
therefrom any defense or objection then available to the party which this rule
permits to be raised by motion, the party shall not thereafter make a motion
based on the defense or objection so omitted, except a motion as provided in
subdivision (h)(2) hereof on any of the grounds there stated.
(h) Waiver or preservation of certain defenses.
(1) A defense of lack of jurisdiction over the person, improper venue,
insufficiency of process, or insufficiency of service of process is waived (A) if
omitted from a motion in the circumstances described in subdivision (g), or (B) if
it is neither made by motion under this rule nor included in a responsive pleading
or an amendment thereof permitted by Rule 15(a) to be made as a matter of
course.
(2) A defense of failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, a
defense of failure to join a party indispensable under Rule 19, and an objection of
failure to state a legal defense to a claim may be made in any pleading permitted
or ordered under Rule 7(a), or by motion for judgment on the pleadings, or at the
trial on the merits.
(3) Whenever it appears by suggestion of the parties or otherwise that the
court lacks jurisdiction of the subject matter, the court shall dismiss the action.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 12 applies in the district courts, except that (1)
all time periods of thirty (30) days are reduced to fourteen (14) days for all
actions other than an action for unlawful detainer as defined in § 6-6-310(2), Ala.
Code 1975, and an action for eviction as defined in §35-9A-141(5), Ala. Code
1975, in which actions a defendant shall serve an answer within seven (7)
calendar days after service of the summons and complaint, and (2) the
provisions for the assertion of certain defenses by motion at the option of the
pleader in Rule 12 are deleted.