Rule 5.
Service and filing of pleadings and other papers.
(a) Service: When required. Except as otherwise provided in these rules,
every order required by its terms to be served, every pleading subsequent to the
original complaint unless the court otherwise orders because of numerous
defendants, every paper relating to discovery required to be served upon a party
unless the court otherwise orders, every written motion other than one which may
be heard ex parte, and every written notice, appearance, demand, offer of
judgment, designation of record on appeal, and similar paper shall be served
upon each of the parties. No service need be made on parties in default for
failure to appear except that pleadings asserting new or additional claims for
relief against them shall be served upon them in the manner provided for service
of summons in Rule 4.
In an action begun by seizure of property, in which no person need be or
is named as defendant, any service required to be made prior to the filing of an
answer, claim, or appearance shall be made upon the person having custody or
possession of the property at the time of its seizure.
(b) Same: How made. Whenever under these rules service is required or
permitted to be made upon a party represented by an attorney, the service shall
be made upon the attorney unless service upon the party is ordered by the court.
Service upon the attorney or upon a party shall be made by delivering a copy to
the attorney or the party or by mailing it to the attorney or the party at the
attorney's or party's last known address, or, if no address is known, by leaving it
with the clerk of the court. Delivery of a copy within this rule means: handing it to
the attorney or party; or leaving it at the attorney's or party's office with a clerk or
other person in charge thereof; or, if there is no one in charge, leaving it in a
conspicuous place therein; or, if the office is closed or the person to be served
has no office, leaving it at the person's dwelling house or usual place of abode
with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein. Service by
mail is complete upon mailing.
If the attorney for the party to be served or the party to be served is a
registered user of the electronic-filing system as provided for by order or rules of
the Supreme Court of Alabama, service may be made by electronic transmittal in
accordance therewith. Service by electronic means in compliance with those
orders and rules shall be complete on transmission of the electronic document.
(c) Same: Numerous defendants. In any action in which there are
unusually large numbers of defendants, the court, upon motion or of its own
initiative, may order that service of the pleadings of the defendants and replies
thereto need not be made as between the defendants and that any cross-claim,
counterclaim, or matter constituting an avoidance or affirmative defense
contained therein shall be deemed to be denied or avoided by all other parties
and that the filing of any such pleading and service thereof upon the plaintiff
constitutes due notice of it to the parties. A copy of every such order shall be
served upon the parties in such manner and form as the court directs.
(d) Filing; certificate of service. All papers after the complaint required
to be served upon a party, together with a certificate of service, shall be filed with
the court either before service or within a reasonable time thereafter, except that
discovery material shall not be filed other than upon order of the court, for use at
trial, or in connection with motions. For purposes of this rule, "discovery
material" shall include depositions upon oral examination or written questions,
notices of deposition, interrogatories, requests for production of documents,
requests for admission, and answers, responses, and objections thereto. The
person responsible for service of the discovery material shall retain the original
and become custodian.
A certificate of service shall list the names and addresses, including the e-
mail addresses of registered electronic-filing-system users, if known, of all
attorneys or pro se parties upon whom the paper has been served.
All discovery material may be served electronically using the court's
electronic filing system. Such service will generate an entry in the case-action
summary documenting the fact of service, the date of service, and the nature of
the document or documents served, but the discovery will not be filed, entered,
or retained in electronic form in the court file.
During the pendency of any case, the custodian of any discovery material
shall provide to counsel for all other parties reasonable access to the material
and an opportunity to duplicate the material at the expense of the copying party.
(e) Filing with the court defined. The filing of papers with the court as
required by these rules shall be made by filing them with the clerk of the court,
except that the judge may permit the papers to be filed with the judge, in which
event, the judge shall note thereon the filing date and forthwith transmit them to
the office of the clerk. A pleading, motion, order, or other document filed by
electronic means in accordance with an order or rules of the Supreme Court of
Alabama constitutes filing with the court for the purpose of applying these rules.
The clerk shall not refuse to accept for filing any document presented for that
purpose solely because it is not presented in proper form as required by these
rules.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 5 applies in the district court.