Rule 37.
Failure to make discovery: Sanctions.
(a) Motion for order compelling discovery. A party, upon reasonable notice
to other parties and all persons affected thereby, may apply for an order
compelling discovery as follows:
(1) APPROPRIATE COURT. An application for an order to a party may be
made to the court in which the action is pending, or, on matters relating
to a deposition being taken within the state in a circuit other than the
circuit in which the action is pending, to the court in the circuit where
the deposition is being taken. An application for an order to a party on
matters relating to a deposition being taken outside the state may also
be made to any court having general civil jurisdiction in the place
where the deposition is being taken. An application for an order to a
nonparty on matters relating to a subpoena for production or inspection
of materials within this state shall be made to the court in the circuit
where the discovery is being sought or the court in the circuit where
the action is pending. An application for an order to a deponent who is
not a party and whose deposition is being taken within the state, may
be made to the court in the circuit where the deposition is being taken
or in which the action is pending. An application for an order to a
deponent who is not a party on matters relating to a deposition being
taken outside the state, shall be made to any court having general civil
jurisdiction in the place where the deposition is being taken.
(2) MOTION. If a deponent fails to answer a question propounded or
submitted under Rule 30 or Rule 31, or a corporation or other entity
fails to make a designation under Rule 30(b)(6) or 31(a), or a party fails
to answer an interrogatory submitted under Rule 33, or if a party, in
response to a request for production or inspection submitted under
Rule 30(b)(5), or if a party in a response to a request for production or
inspection submitted under Rule 34, fails to respond that production or
inspection will be permitted as requested or fails to produce or permit
inspection as requested, or if a person objects to or fails to comply, in
whole or in part, with a subpoena under Rule 45(a)(3), the discovering
party may move for an order compelling an answer, or designation, or
an order compelling production or inspection in accordance with the
subpoena. If a person or a party objects to the notice of a proposed
subpoena under Rule 45(a)(3), the discovering party may move for an
order compelling issuance of the subpoena. When taking a deposition
on oral examination, the proponent of the question may complete or
adjourn the examination before applying for an order.
A motion relating to discovery issues shall be accompanied by a
statement of the attorney for the moving party stating that the attorney,
before filing the motion, has endeavored to resolve the subject of the
discovery motion through correspondence or discussions with
opposing counsel or, if the opposing party is not represented by
counsel, with the opposing party.
If the court denies the motion in whole or in part, it may make such
protective order as it would have been empowered to make on a
motion made pursuant to Rule 26(c).
(3) EVASIVE OR INCOMPLETE ANSWER. For purposes of this subdivision an
evasive or incomplete answer is to be treated as a failure to answer.
(4) AWARD OF EXPENSES OF MOTION. If the motion is granted, the court shall,
after opportunity for hearing, require the party or deponent whose
conduct necessitated the motion or the party advising such conduct or
both of them to pay to the moving party the reasonable expenses
incurred in obtaining the order, including attorney fees, unless the court
finds that the opposition to the motion was substantially justified or that
other circumstances make an award of expenses unjust.
If the motion is denied, the court shall, after opportunity for hearing,
require the moving party to pay to the party or deponent who opposed
the motion the reasonable expenses incurred in opposing the motion,
including attorney fees, unless the court finds that the making of the
motion was substantially justified or that other circumstances make an
award of expenses unjust.
If the motion is granted in part and denied in part, the court may
apportion the reasonable expenses incurred in relation to the motion
among the parties and persons in a just manner.
(b) Failure to comply with order.
(1) SANCTIONS BY A CIRCUIT JUDGE OR COURT IN PLACE WHERE DEPOSITION IS
TAKEN OR PRODUCTION SOUGHT. If a deponent fails to be sworn or to
answer a question after being directed to do so by a circuit judge or,
when the deposition is being taken outside the state, by the court in the
place in which the deposition is being taken; or, if a person, not a party,
fails to permit production of documents or entry upon land under Rule
45(a)(3) after being directed to do so by a circuit judge or, when
production or entry is sought outside the state, by the court in the place
where the documents, things, or land are located, the failure may be
considered a contempt of court.
(2) SANCTIONS BY COURT IN WHICH ACTION IS PENDING. If a party or an officer,
director, or managing agent of a party or a person designated under
Rule 30(b)(6) or 31(a) to testify on behalf of a party fails to obey an
order to provide or permit discovery, including an order made under
subdivision (a) of this rule or Rule 35, the court in which the action is
pending may make such orders in regard to the failure as are just, and
among others the following:
(A) An order that the matters regarding which the order was made
or any other designated facts shall be taken to be established for
the purposes of the action in accordance with the claim of the party
obtaining the order;
(B) An order refusing to allow the disobedient party to support or
oppose designated claims or defenses, or prohibiting that party
from introducing designated matters in evidence;
(C) An order striking out pleadings or parts thereof, or staying
further proceedings until the order is obeyed, or dismissing the
action or proceeding or any part thereof, or rendering a judgment
by default against the disobedient party;
(D) In lieu of any of the foregoing orders or in addition thereto, an
order treating as a contempt of court the failure to obey any orders
except an order to submit to a physical or mental examination;
(E) Where a party has failed to comply with an order under Rule
35(a) requiring that party to produce another for examination, such
orders as are listed in paragraphs (A), (B), and (C) of this
subdivision, unless the party failing to comply shows that that party
is unable to produce such person for examination.
In lieu of any of the foregoing orders or in addition thereto, the court shall
require the party failing to obey the order to pay the reasonable expenses,
including attorney fees, caused by the failure, unless the court finds that the
failure was substantially justified or that other circumstances make an award of
expenses unjust.
(c) Expenses on failure to admit. If a party fails to admit the genuineness
of any document or the truth of any matter as requested under Rule 36, and if the
party requesting the admissions thereafter proves the genuineness of the
document or the truth of the matter, the requesting party may apply to the court
for an order requiring the other party to pay the reasonable expenses incurred in
making that proof, including reasonable attorney fees. The court shall make the
order unless it finds that (1) the request was held objectionable pursuant to Rule
36(a), or (2) the admission sought was of no substantial importance, or (3) the
party failing to admit had reasonable ground to believe that the party might
prevail on the matter, or (4) there was other good reason for the failure to admit.
(d) Failure of party to attend at own deposition or serve answers to
interrogatories or respond to request for inspection. If a party or an officer,
director, or managing agent of a party or a person designated under Rule
30(b)(6) or 31(a) to testify on behalf of a party fails (1) to appear before the
officer who is to take the deposition, after being served with a proper notice, or to
comply with a properly served request for production under Rule 30(b)(5), without
having made an objection thereto, or (2) to serve answers or objections to
interrogatories submitted under Rule 33, after proper service of the
interrogatories, or (3) to serve a written response to a request for production or
inspection submitted under Rule 34, after proper service of the request, the court
in which the action is pending on motion may make such orders in regard to the
failure as are just, and among others it may take any action authorized under
paragraphs (A), (B), and (C) of subdivision (b)(2) of this rule. In lieu of any order
or in addition thereto, the court shall require the party failing to act to pay the
reasonable expenses, including attorney’s fees, caused by the failure, unless the
court finds that the failure was substantially justified or that other circumstances
make an award of expenses unjust.
The failure to act described in this subdivision may not be excused on the
ground that the discovery sought is objectionable unless the party failing to act
has applied for a protective order as provided by Rule 26(c).
(e), (f) [Omitted.]
(g) Failure to preserve electronically stored information. If electronically
stored information that should have been preserved in the anticipation or conduct
of litigation is lost because a party failed to take reasonable steps to preserve it,
and if it cannot be restored or replaced through additional discovery, the court:
(1) upon finding prejudice to another party from loss of the information,
may order measures no greater than necessary to cure the
prejudice; or
(2) only upon finding that the party acted with the intent to deprive
another party of use of the information in the litigation, may:
(A) presume that the lost information was unfavorable to the party
responsible for its loss;
(B) instruct the jury that it may or must presume the information
was unfavorable to the party responsible for its loss; or
(C) dismiss the action or enter a default judgment.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 37 applies in the district courts in those
instances in which discovery has been permitted pursuant to Rule 26(dc).