Rule 11.
Signing of pleadings, motions, or other papers.
(a) Every pleading, motion, or other paper of a party represented by
an attorney shall be signed by at least one attorney of record in the
attorney's individual name, whose address shall be stated. A party who is
not represented by an attorney shall sign the pleading, motion, or other
paper, and state the party's address. Except when otherwise specifically
provided by rule or statute, pleadings, motions, or other papers need not
be verified or accompanied by affidavit. The rule in equity that the
averments of an answer under oath must be overcome by the testimony of
two witnesses or of one witness sustained by corroborating circumstances
is abolished. The signature of an attorney constitutes a certificate by the
attorney that the attorney has read the pleading, motion, or other paper;
that to the best of the attorney's knowledge, information, and belief there is
good ground to support it; and that it is not interposed for delay. As
provided in Rule 30(G) of the Alabama Rules of Judicial Administration, an
electronic signature is a "signature" under these Rules. If a pleading,
motion, or other paper is not signed or is signed with intent to defeat the
purpose of this rule, it may be stricken as sham and false and the action
may proceed as though the pleading, motion, or other paper had not been
served. For a willful violation of this rule an attorney may be subjected to
appropriate disciplinary action. Similar action may be taken if scandalous
or indecent matter is inserted.
(b) Limited-scope representation. An attorney may draft or help to
draft a pleading, motion, or other paper filed by an otherwise self-
represented person. The attorney need not sign that pleading, motion, or
other paper but shall include a notation at the end stating: "This document
was prepared with the assistance of a licensed Alabama lawyer pursuant
to Rule 1.2(c), Alabama Rules of Professional Conduct." In providing such
drafting assistance, the attorney may rely on the otherwise self-
represented person’s representation of the facts, unless the attorney has
reason to believe that such representation is false or materially
insufficient.
(dc) District Court Rule. Rule 11 applies in the district courts.