Rule 19.
Joinder of persons needed for just adjudication.
(a) Persons to be joined if feasible. A person who is subject to jurisdiction
of the court shall be joined as a party in the action if (1) in the person’s absence
complete relief cannot be accorded among those already parties, or (2) the
person claims an interest relating to the subject of the action and is so situated
that the disposition of the action in the person’s absence may (i) as a practical
matter impair or impede the person’s ability to protect that interest or (ii) leave
any of the persons already parties subject to a substantial risk of incurring
double, multiple, or otherwise inconsistent obligations by reason of the claimed
interest. If the person has not been so joined, the court shall order that the
person be made a party. If the person should join as a plaintiff but refuses to do
so, the person may be made a defendant, or, in a proper case, an involuntary
plaintiff. If the joined party objects to venue and joinder of that party would render
the venue of the action improper, that party shall be dismissed from the action.
(b) Determination by court whenever joinder not feasible. If a person as
described in subdivision (a)(1)-(2) hereof cannot be made a party, the court shall
determine whether in equity and good conscience the action should proceed
among the parties before it, or should be dismissed, the absent person being
thus regarded as indispensable. The factors to be considered by the court
include: first, to what extent a judgment rendered in the person’s absence might
be prejudicial to the person or those already parties; second, the extent to which,
by protective provisions in the judgment, by the shaping of relief, or other
measures, the prejudice can be lessened or avoided; third, whether a judgment
rendered in the person’s absence will be adequate; fourth, whether the plaintiff
will have an adequate remedy if the action is dismissed for nonjoinder.
(c) Pleading reasons for nonjoinder. A pleading asserting a claim for relief
shall state the names, if known to the pleader, of any persons as described in
subdivision (a)(1)-(2) hereof who are not joined, and the reasons why they are
not joined.
(d) Exception of class actions. This rule is subject to the provisions of Rule
23.
(dc) District court rule. Rule 19 applies in the district courts except that
Rule 19(d) has no effect in view of inapplicability of Rule 23, Class Actions, in the
district courts.